Management of Evolving Pathogen

for Durable Resistance

1

Amaresh Hadimani1*, Chetana Veerendra Kalammanavar2, Virupakshi Hiremata3 
and Vani N.U4
1Ph.D. Scholar Department of Plant Pathology, Kittur Rani Chennamma, College 
of Horticulture, University of Horticultural sciences, Bagalkot, Karnataka - 587104
2Project Assistant, ICAR-AICRP on Fruits, KRC College of Horticulture, Arabhavi, 
University of Horticultural sciences, Bagalkot, Karnataka - 587104
3Senior Research Fellow Division of Vegetable Crops ICAR- Indian Institute of 
Horticultural Research, Bengaluru-560089
4Senior Research Fellow ICAR-AICRP on Fruits, ICAR- Indian Institute of 
Horticultural Research, Bengaluru-560089

Abstract

No resistance endures permanently in an evolutionary sense. A resistance’s level 
of durability may be thought of as a quantitative feature; resistances might be very 
durable or completely non-lasting (ephemeral or fleeting). According to experts, fungi 
and bacteria with a limited host range exhibit ephemeral resistance. A hypersensitive 
response (HR), substantial gene inheritance, and several resistance genes many of 
which often appear in multiple allelic series and/or complicated lociare its defining 
traits. These resistance genes (alleles) interact gene for gene with the pathogen’s 
avirulence genes (alleles) to produce an unfavourable response. By causing a loss 
mutation in the associated avirulence allele, the pathogen counteracts the action of 
the resistance gene. The pathogenicity is reinstated and the incompatible response 
is no longer induced. Without losing fitness, the pathogens may tolerate the loss 
of several avirulences. Durable resistance to specialised bacteria and fungi is often 
quantitative and dependent on the cumulative effects of many genes, resulting in a 
different kind of resistance than the hypersensitive response. In most commercial 

2

cultivars, this quantitative resistance to practically all diseases is found at low to 
good levels. Durable monogenic resistance also exists, and it’s often of the non-HR 
kind. Resistance to bacteria and fungi with broad host ranges is often quantitative 
and long-lasting. Even when they are based on HR resistances that are monogenic, 
race-specific, viral resistances are often very resilient. The degree of specialisation 
does not seem to be related to how long a resistance lasts.

Go back young man and gather up your weary and defeated genes of the past, 
take your currently successful genes, find some new ones if you can, and build yourself 
a genetic pyramid.(Nelson, 1978, p. 376)

Keywords: Evolving pathogens; Durable resistance; Host and Pathogen

Introduction

It is commonly recognised that dangerous parasites have the ability to harm and infect 
their hosts. Thus, virulence is the primary characteristic of infections, and for a very long 
time, one of the main objectives of pathology, particularly plant pathology, has been to 
comprehend the development of virulence. Important phenomena like the emergence 
and reemergence of pathogens, host switching, host range expansion, and overcoming 
host resistance may be influenced by the evolution of virulence and may jeopardise 
the efficacy of control measures for infectious diseases affecting humans, domestic 
animals, and plants. Furthermore, diseases have a significant influence in determining 
the dynamics and composition of ecosystems (Bull, 1994; Ebert and Hamilton, 1996; 
Frank, 1996; Read, 1994), which may be modified through virulence evolution. Harris 
etal., 2020, reported that among the top ten unanswered question in molecular plant 
microbe interaction, “How do pathogens evolve novel virulence activities?” is the 
second last question asked at about 1400 accomplices at 2019 International Congress 
on Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions meeting held at Glasgow.

Evolving Pathogen

Epidemics of plant diseases brought on by the invasion of exotic fungal infections are 
a well-known occurrence. An explosive disease outbreak may be caused by the host’s 
low level of resistance and the pathogen’s too aggressive behavior (which reflects the 
absence of past coevolution). Events surrounding the introduction provide the disease 
a window of opportunity for evolution. A plant disease is often exposed to regular 
selection restrictions in the area where it is endemic, favoring the preservation of a 
population structure that is comparatively stable, although variable, over time. It will 
often be exposed to novel or episodic selection when brought into a new habitat. 
This reflects abrupt exposure to new biotic and abiotic variables, such as a new host 
population, new vectors, new competitors, or a different temperature. These factors 

3

give rise to the possibility of quick evolution (Brasier,1995).

Both qualitative and quantitative resistance to disease have historically been 
identified in plants. Major genes, which provide phenotypically total or partial 
resistance to the virus, are genetically responsible for controlling qualitative resistance. 
It is based on gene-for-gene interactions, where the protein produced by the pathogen’s 
avirulence gene is specifically ‘recognized’ by the plant’s equivalent resistance gene 
(Flor, 1971). Following this identification, the plant has a hypersensitive reaction that 
confines the pathogen to the main infection site. In so-called “boom-and-bust” cycles, 
the development of the pathogen’s virulence often follows the deployment of key 
genes providing qualitative resistance ( Johnson, 1961; Parlevliet, 1989). According to 
Poland etal. (2009) quantitative resistance is often regulated by a number of genetic 
variables (minor genes) in the plant that provide partial resistance to the pathogen 
and slow the spread of epidemics over time. Additionally, there is mounting evidence 
that pathogen genotypes that may overcome quantitative resistance are being chosen 
(Burdon etal., 2014).

The reason why the bacteria evolve quickly is because they reproduce at a fast 
rate. Mutations of bacteria produce new strains. Some bacteria might become resistant 
to certain antibiotics, such as penicillin, and cannot be destroyed by the antibiotic. 
The evolution of the bacteria is an example of natural selection.

One of the most relevant consequences of novel virulence activities is the 
ability to infect new hosts, which ultimately leads to the emergence of new diseases 
(McLeish etal., 2017). 

We have some knowledge about the mechanisms for overcoming the defences 
and exploiting host resources by pathogens, but we still do not know the key 
mechanisms that lead to the adaptation to a new host and, thus, determine pathogen 
host range (Morris etal., 2019). 

Pathogen host range may vary from one or very few to several hundred different 
plant species (specialists versus generalists pathogens), although this may be difficult 
to determine, depending on the definitions of host and adaptation to host (Morris 
etal., 2019). Determinants of host range may be both intrinsic (availability of virulence 
factors that allow the interaction with different hosts) and extrinsic (e.g., exposure 
of plants to microorganisms and environmental conditions favorable for infection) 
(McLeish etal. 2017) Extrinsic determinants include ecological factors, such as host 
population structure and diversity, epidemiological, such as vector availability and 
dynamics, or even stochastic events (Brown and Tellier 2011). Host range evolution 
has mostly been studied by focusing on the intrinsic, genetic factors, but studies on 
the role of extrinsic factors are starting to gain importance (McLeish etal. 2017a). 

4

Adaptation of pathogens to new hosts may lead to host range expansions and host 
jumps, the latter when the ability to infect a new host leads to genetic differentiation 
of pathogen populations on different hosts and, finally, pathogen speciation (Thines 
2019). It is broadly observed that pathogens tend to infect plants that are closely 
related, rendering the phylogenetic distance between plant taxa as an important 
predictor of the risk of a new host acquisition (Gilbert etal. 2012; Schulze-Lefert and 
Panstruga 2011). However, there are also many examples of related plant pathogens 
that are able to infect distant hosts, so other factors such as host geographical, 
ecological, or physiological distance may play a role (McLeish etal. 2017; Morris and 
Moury 2019; Thines 2019). This is the case of new host acquisitions by indigenous 
pathogens when a host is introduced in a new area, such as the case of Cocoa swollen 
shoot virus, which was a pathogen of the native forest tree Cola chlamydantha before.

Management Stratergies Against Plant Pathogens

Durable disease resistance 

Is defined as resistance that has remained effective while a cu1tivar possessing it has 
been widely cultivated in an environment favoring the disease. This characteristic of 
resistance is recognised retrospectively, as are all other characteristics of interactions 
between hosts and pathogens ( Johnson, R.1983).

Disease resistance genes are a scarce resource, and it is expensive to introduce 
them into new kinds. It is consequently very difficult to maintain their effectiveness 
over time (i.e., their durability). According to Johnson (1981), a plant’s ability to 
withstand illness is lasting if the cultivar that has it is extensively grown. The length of 
time it takes for the selection of pathogen genotypes to overcome the resistance and 
make the resistance gene useless is a measure of how durable a disease resistance gene 
is. The pathogen genotype frequency that must be attained for the resistance to be 
deemed broken down relies on the socioeconomic situation and is obviously arbitrary.
The biology of the targeted pathogen (e.g., ploidy, reproductive mode, mutation rate) 
and other intrinsic aspects of the pathosystem, such as the mechanism and genetics 
of the molecular interaction, are all important factors that affect durability (Brown, 
2015). However, it also relies on outside variables (such as agronomic practises and 
climatic circumstances) that have an impact on the fitness of the targeted species 
(Brown, 2015). Only by modifying these external conditions can the resistance genes’ 
efficiency be maintained after they have been inserted into plant kinds.

Combining disease management methods with disease resistance genes might 
possibly increase the longevity of disease resistance genes since doing so maximises 
the effectiveness of all available “weapons” Applying fungicides that target the same 
pathogen, for example, may boost the longevity of a resistance gene that targets a 

5

pathogenic fungus. Sadly, relatively few models or empirical investigations have taken 
into account such mixtures of diverse selection forces to postpone the establishment 
of virulence. Iacono et al. (2013) shown theoretically that the addition of a source 
of demographic stochasticity, such as occasional fungicide treatments, increases the 
longevity of a resistant cultivar.

To manage the diamond back moth, Plutella xylostella, Onstad et al. (2013) 
created a theoretical model incorporating insecticides, parasitoids, and transgenic 
insecticidal crops.They demonstrated how different insect control strategies worked 
together to boost each other’s endurance. To fully understand the potential and 
constraints of such pairings, further research is urgently required.The use of pesticides 
may be one of the restrictions.

Plants employ a great variety of defense mechanisms to cope with the multitude 

of organisms that try to exploit plants. 

The defense mechanisms can be classified in

1.  Avoiding, 

2.  Resistance and 

3.  Tolerance mechanisms

Avoiding is especially used against animal parasites as these have sensorial abilities. 
Tolerance, enduring the parasite with relatively little damage, does not seem to play 
a significant role with pathogens. In breeding against pathogens it is resistance,that 
is used almost exclusively. Resistance mechanisms, reducing the growth and/or 
development rate of the pathogen, are nearly always of a biochemical nature. Soon 
after resistance to pathogens was introduced it became apparent that pathogen 
populations could adapt to such resistances; the resistance “broke down”. 

Strategies for the deployment of disease resistance genes

One important external aspect that significantly affects the longevity of disease 
resistance genes is their deployment in the field. When there are several sources of 
resistance genes present at once, planning opportunities based on the distribution 
of these genes throughout time and place are made possible. These tactics may be 
divided into four groups: 

(1) The insertion of multiple resistance genes into a single plant (pyramiding)

(2) The use of multiple resistance genes in various plants within or between fields 
(multiline and variety mixtures)

(3) The periodic switching of multiple resistance genes at the same site (rotation); and 

6

(4) The use of each resistance gene until the resistance conferred by it is broken 
down and replaced by a new resistance gene (sequential release).

The key global issues must be taken into consideration when talking about 
lasting resistance.  According to predictions made by Alexandratos and Bruinsma 
(2012), Tilman etal. (2011) between the years of 2005 and 2050, there will be an 
increase in demand for agricultural production of between 60 and 110 per cent, 
and there may be even more of a rise in demand for forest products. According to 
studies by  Garrett etal. (2006), mean variations in temperature and precipitation 
may have a positive, negative, or neutral effect on some disorders. The predicted rise 
in climate variability, which might increase the number of important illnesses and 
pests in a particular region and the annual swings in their prevalence, may be of 
more concern. The most effective control strategy often is host plant resistance for 
social, economic, and environmental reasons. 

Non-durable resistance 

In an evolutionary sense, every kind of resistance is temporary. However, there are 
significant variations in how easily parasites may get beyond a resistance. The longevity 
of a resistance varies widely in agriculture as well. As in the case of the Phylloxera 
aphid resistance of grape (Vitisvinifera L.) rootstocks, resistance may already have 
been neutralised in the latter phases of the breeding programme (at zero years), and 
may still be effective after more than 130 years and widespread exposure (Niks and 
Butler, 1993). And there are obvious distinctions among the non-durable kinds of 
resistance as well. Numerous main gene resistance and all QR based on one to several 
genes proved to be durable forms of resistance adopted by breeders that have not 
yet completely broken down (Parlevliet and Alemayehu 1997).On the other hand, 
certain patterns are discernible. There are several forms of resistance that have been 
quite elusive, with effective times varying from months to years. This obviously 
short-lived resistance is usually always under the control of a significant gene that 
also regulates the hypersensitive response. These genes function in a gene-for-gene 
manner with the pathogen’s avirulence genes. Most of the pathogens are specialised 
fungi or bacteria, including cereal rusts, cereal powdery mildew, downy mildews of 
lettuce and lima beans, flax rust of flax, rusts of maize, late blight of potatoes, blast 
of rice, bean rust of common beans (Phaseolusvulgaris L.), anthracnose of common 
beans, and bacterial blight of rice (Parlevliet, 1993). 

Important breeding techniques for conferring wide breadth and long-lasting 
resistance to diseases that reduce rice output include marker-assisted selection and 
gene pyramiding. Bacterial leaf blight (BLB), which is brought on by the pathogen 
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae, is one such disease that significantly reduces rice yield. 

7

Numerous molecular marker approaches have previously been developed because 
molecular markers are crucial for both marker-assisted selection and gene pyramiding. 
Currently, DNA-based markers, sometimes referred to as molecular markers, are the 
most frequently employed ones. Based on the methods used to find them, the molecular 
markers are divided into two main types. These indicators are based on hybridization and 
polymerase chain reaction. The morphological (traditionally based) and bio-chemical 
(enzyme-based) markers are two more kinds of markers that are accessible. The most 
effective method for managing the BLB disease of rice is host plant/varietal resistance.

Table1: Number of years that the resistance to yellow rust in wheat (Triticumaestivum) 
cultivars and to powdery mildew in barley (Hordeumvulgare) cultivars remained 
effective in The Netherlands. (Anonymous, 1955-1994)

Wheat cultivar  Year  Barley cultivar
1
Tadorna 
Ramona  
1 Mazurka
Clement
4
Heines V II
15
Felix
18 Minerva
Arminda

Sultan
Belfor

Year
3
4
5
8
20

Gene pyramiding with the use of markers offers the potential to speed up 
breeding operations and ensure that the host plant’s acquired resistance will last. 
This research explores the use, economic significance, constraints, and potential 
of marker-assisted selection and gene pyramiding for rice BLB disease resistance. 
The creation of BLB disease-resistant rice cultivars is particularly promising using 
marker-assisted selection.

Deployment Strategies

One gene at a time

There are circumstances when the use of a single main gene may be justified, despite 
neither breeders nor pathologists often advocating it. Due to reduced population 
proportions, resistance is more likely to persist in circumstances where the pathogen 
is less prevalent ( Johnson, 1993). Therefore, a single resistance gene may be sufficient 
for a very long time in circumstances where a disease occurs at a moderate or low 
intensity, releasing resources to breed for durability to more serious/frequent illnesses. 
A second example would be the spread of new, particularly aggressive disease 
populations or pathogen species.Even while it is preferred to save resistant genes 
for use in a deployment strategy of some kind, it can be essential to employ single 
genes to maintain an industry’s viability until longer-lasting tactics can be devised.

8

Gene rotation

Gene rotation entails the deployment of an efficient resistance gene, replacement 
with a different gene after the emergence of a virulent race, and reuse of the original 
resistance in the future following a sufficient reduction in the frequency of the related 
race (Crill, 1977). Although gene rotation strategies have been used to combat 
rice blast and rice tungro disease (Manwan et al., 1985), it is difficult to assess the 
effectiveness of these efforts (Mundt, 1994). Gene rotation is often accompanied 
with two significant challenges. The first is the very challenging logistical need of 
precisely tracking virulence, having sufficient supplies of replacement cultivar seed 
on hand, and securing permission from all farmers to switch cultivars at once. More 
importantly, once the associated resistance develops, virulences may not return to 
their initial frequencies the gene is removed.

Gene pyramiding

There is broad agreement that combining genes for resistance (gene pyramids) is a 
useful approach for increasing durability, with many known successes.The practice of 
mixing two or more genes from various parents to create better lines and variations 
is known as gene pyramiding. Pyramiding is the process of merging or stacking 
numerous genes, which causes many genes to be expressed at once in different 
species. Molecular identifiers make it easier to choose the best plants to use moving 
forward. In agricultural research, the word “gene pyramiding” refers to a breeding 
strategy for disease prevention and increased crop output. Gene pyramiding is a 
novel branch of plant breeding that has emerged as a result of the advancement of 
molecular genetics and related technologies like marker-assisted selection. There are 
two distinct components to the gene pyramiding technique. A pedigree, which is the 
first section, seeks to combine all the target genes into a single genotype known as 
the root genotype. The fixation phase, which is the second stage, tries to make the 
target genes homozygous, creating the optimum genotype from a single genotype. 
By lowering the number of generations that breeders must examine to make sure 
they have the appropriate gene combination, molecular marker genotyping helps 
speed up the gene pyramiding process. A crucial method for improving germplasm 
is known as Gene pyramiding (Rajpurohit etal., 2003). The most effective method for 
managing the BLB disease of rice is host plant/varietal resistance. Gene pyramiding 
with the use of markers offers the potential to speed up breeding operations and 
ensure that the host plant’s acquired resistance will last. This research explores the 
use, economic significance, constraints, and potential of marker-assisted selection 
and gene pyramiding for rice BLB disease resistance. The creation of BLB disease-
resistant rice cultivars is particularly promising using marker-assisted selection.

9

Conclusion

Combining disease management methods with disease resistance genes might possibly 
increase the longevity of disease resistance genes. Applying fungicides that target 
the same pathogen, for example, may boost the longevity of a resistance gene that 
targets a pathogenic fungus. Sadly, relatively few models or empirical investigations 
have taken into account such mixtures of diverse selection forces to postpone the 
establishment of virulence’s. The addition of a source of demographic stochasticity, 
such as occasional fungicide treatments, increases the longevity of a resistant cultivar. 
To manage the diamond back moth, created a theoretical model incorporating 
insecticides, parasitoids, and transgenic insecticidal crops. They demonstrated how 
different insect control strategies worked together to boost each other’s endurance. 
To fully understand the potential and constraints of such pairings, further research 
is urgently required. The use of pesticides may be one of the restrictions. In spite of 
their advantages in terms of plant protection, their effects on human health and the 
environment may sometimes be too severe for stakeholders to tolerate. More generally, 
it is recommended that agricultural practices (such as preventative measures, disease 
resistance genes, pesticides, biological control, or the use of beneficial organisms) 
designed to control a specific pathogen be combined to increase their individual 
and overall durability(REX Consortium 2016). Financial, organizational, human 
health, and environmental considerations that should be considered on a case-by-
case basis in practice limit such combinations. Finally, it would be a good moment 
to revise Nelson’s recommendation from 1978, which is as follows: Go back, young 
guy, and collect your most effective genes, chemicals, natural enemies, and practices. 
Then, create a very resilient approach, being sure to make it both economically and 
environmentally sustainable.

References

Alemayehu, F., & Parlevliet, J. E. (1997). Variation between and within Ethiopian 

barley landraces. Euphytica, 94, 183-189.

Alexandratos, N., & Bruinsma, J. (2012). World agriculture towards 2030/2050: 

the 2012 revision.

Brasier, C. M., & Buck, K. W. (2001). Rapid evolutionary changes in a globally 
invading fungal pathogen (Dutch elm disease). Biological Invasions, 3, 223-233.

Broers, L. H. M., & Parlevliet, J. E. (1989). Environmental stability of partial resistance 

in spring wheat to wheat leaf rust. Euphytica, 44, 241-245.

Brown, J. K., & Tellier, A. (2011). Plant-parasite coevolution: bridging the gap 

between genetics and ecology. Annual review of phytopathology, 49, 345-367.

10

Brown, T. A. (2015). Confirmatory factor analysis for applied research. Guilford 

publications.

Bull, J. J. (1994). Virulence. Evolution, 48(5), 1423-1437.

Burdon, J. J., Barrett, L. G., Rebetzke, G., & Thrall, P. H. (2014). Guiding deployment of 
resistance in cereals using evolutionary principles. Evolutionary Applications, 7(6), 
609-624.

Crill, P. (1977). An assessment of stabilizing selection in crop variety development. Annual 

Review of Phytopathology, 15(1), 185-202.

Ebert, D., & Hamilton, W. D. (1996). Sex against virulence: the coevolution of 

parasitic diseases. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 11(2), 79-82.

Flor, H. H. (1971). Current status of the gene-for-gene concept. Annual review of 

phytopathology, 9(1), 275-296.

Frank, S. A. (1996). Models of parasite virulence. The Quarterly review of biology, 71(1), 37-78.

Garrett, K. A., Dendy, S. P., Frank, E. E., Rouse, M. N., & Travers, S. E. (2006). 
Climate change effects on plant disease: genomes to ecosystems. Annu. Rev. 
Phytopathol., 44, 489-509.

Gouilleux, F., Wakao, H., Mundt, M., & Groner, B. (1994). Prolactin induces 
phosphorylation of Tyr694 of Stat5 (MGF), a prerequisite for DNA binding 
and induction of transcription. The EMBO journal, 13(18), 4361-4369.

Haddad, W. M., Chellaboina, V., & Rajpurohit, T. (2003, June). Dissipativity 
theory for nonnegative and compartmental dynamical systems with time 
delay. In Proceedings of the 2003 American Control Conference, 2003. (Vol. 1, 
pp. 857-862). IEEE.

Harris, J. M., Balint-Kurti, P., Bede, J. C., Day, B., Gold, S., Goss, E. M., ... & Alvarez, 
M. E. (2020). What are the top 10 unanswered questions in molecular plant-
microbe interactions?. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions, 33(12), 1354-1365.

Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993). Source monitoring. Psychological 

bulletin, 114(1), 3.

oceans and estuaries.

Johnson, T. W., & Sparrow, F. K. (1961). Fungi in oceans and estuaries. Fungi in 

Levine, D. M., Ek, W. E., Zhang, R., Liu, X., Onstad, L., Sather, C., & Vaughan, T. 
L. (2013). A genome-wide association study identifies new susceptibility loci 
for esophageal adenocarcinoma and Barrett’s esophagus. Nature genetics, 45(12), 
1487-1493.

11

Manwan, I., Sama, S., & Rizvi, S. A. (1985). Use of varietal rotation in the management 
of tungro disease in Indonesia. Indonesian Agricultural Research & Development 
Journal, 7(3-4), 43-48.

McLeish, M., Sacristán, S., Fraile, A., & García-Arenal, F. (2017). Scale dependencies 
and generalism in host use shape virus prevalence. Proceedings of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences, 284(1869), 20172066.

Morris, C. E., Lamichhane, J. R., Nikolić, I., Stanković, S., & Moury, B. (2019). 
The overlapping continuum of host range among strains in the Pseudomonas 
syringae complex. Phytopathology Research, 1, 1-16.

Nelson, R. (1978). Genetics of horizontal resistance to plant diseases. Annu. Rev. 

Phytopathol. 16, 359–378

Niks, R. E., & Butler, G. M. (1993). Evaluation of morphology of infection structures 
in distinguishing between different Allium rust fungi. Netherlands Journal of 
Plant Pathology, 99, 139-149.

Parlevliet, J. E. (1993). What is durable resistance, a general outline. In Durability 

of disease resistance (pp. 23-39). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.

Poland, J. A., Balint-Kurti, P. J., Wisser, R. J., Pratt, R. C., & Nelson, R. J. (2009). 
Shades of gray: the world of quantitative disease resistance. Trends in plant 
science, 14(1), 21-29.

Read, A. F. (1994). The evolution of virulence. Trends in microbiology, 2(3), 73-76.

REX Consortium (2016) Combining Selective Pressures to Enhance the Durability 

of Disease Resistance Genes. Front. Plant Sci. 7:1916.

Rietveld, C. A., Medland, S. E., Derringer, J., Yang, J., Esko, T., Martin, N. W., & 
Preisig, M. (2013). GWAS of 126,559 individuals identifies genetic variants 
associated with educational attainment. science, 340(6139), 1467-1471.

Schulze-Lefert, P., & Panstruga, R. (2011). A molecular evolutionary concept connecting 
nonhost resistance, pathogen host range, and pathogen speciation. Trends in 
plant science, 16(3), 117-125

Thines, M. (2019). An evolutionary framework for host shifts–jumping ships for 

survival. New Phytologist, 224(2), 605-617.

Tilman, D., Balzer, C., Hill, J., & Befort, B. L. (2011). Global food demand and the 
sustainable intensification of agriculture. Proceedings of the national academy of 
sciences, 108(50), 20260-20264.

12

2

Integrated Approach in Plants 

Disease Management

Dr. S.K. Arsia1, Dr. OP Bharti2 and Dr. Satish Sharma1
1RVSKVV Gwalior, Dept. of plant Pathology, B.M. College of Agriculture Khandwa 
(M.P.) 
2J.N.K.V.V.-Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Kolipura, Tappar Indore Road, Harda (M.P.)

Abstract

Plant diseases are caused by various biotic constraints that lead to significant crop 
yield loss over the globe. Plant diseases could be managed by combining several 
methods. The use of holistic combination of biological, cultural, physical and chemical 
control strategies under integrated disease management (IDM) is proved to be more 
effective and sustainable rather than using a single component strategy. Conventional 
cultural, Physical, mechanical and chemical methods are generally followed by most 
of the farmers for plant disease management as a single strategic manner in which 
chemical methods have immediate effect on the plant pathogens and hence most of 
the farmers are following though it is having the deleterious effects whereas biological 
control methods with disease resistance are having slow effect but management is 
permanent and having good impact on plant growth promotion. Nevertheless, the 
strategy of IDM use is gaining Importance, but in developing countries it often 
lacks the enabling environment for its successful implementation. As the scenario 
of farming for the last few decades clearly showed that adoption of IDM and 
participatory approaches helped farmers improve their overall crop management, 
including disease management, reducing costs and improving production efficiency. 
Integrating all these method to manage the plant disease is known as Integrated 
Plant Disease Management.

Keywords: Integrated, Disease management, IDM, Plant, and approach 

13

Introduction

Integrated disease management (IDM) can be defined as a decision-based process 
in which multiple tactics and strategies of disease management are coordinated 
to optimize the management of pathogen on ecofriendly and economical feasible 
way. The IDM is an alternative approach of conventional use of physical, cultural, 
biological and chemical as single component strategy in which all the approaches 
are used in combination with the judicious and limited use of chemicals with the 
main objective to keep the disease incidence below economic threshold level. IDM 
may include site selection and preparation, utilizing resistant cultivars, altering 
planting practices, modifying the environment by drainage, irrigation, pruning, 
thinning, shading, and applying pesticides, wherever required. But in addition to 
these traditional measures, monitoring environmental factors (temperature, moisture, 
soil pH, nutrients, etc.), disease forecasting, and establishing economic thresholds 
are important to the management scheme (Khoury and Makkouk, 2010).

Crops are infected by many of the pathogens and cause diseases which lead 
to quantitative and qualitative crop yield loss. It is an estimate that 10-15% of low 
crop yields in developing countries due to disease attack, and losses may be higher if 
post harvest diseases are considered. It is known that more than 800 million people 
do not have enough food, and around 1.3 billion live on less than one dollar a day 
in the developing countries at present (FAO, 2004). It is a study that all production 
constraints including diseases for six major crops viz. wheat, rice, sorghum, chickpea, 
cassava, and cowpea in Asian and African farming systems losses caused due to 
diseases ranged from 3 to 14%, however yield losses was ranged 16 to 37% due to 
all biotic factors and yield losses to all crop production constraints ranged from 36 
to 65% (Waddington et al., 2010). In India, management of diseases in crop is most 
important because of the Indian foreign exchange and economy greatly depends on 
farming. The diseases management practices are one of the tool to strengthening of 
farm production which will promote the crop yield. The objectives of IDM practices 
are as follows-

• Management of wide range of pathogen simultaneously

• Reduction of chances of entry of pathogen

• Regular monitoring of the spread of the disease

• Elimination of any condition which influence the pathogenic growth and spread

• Integrated management of multiple diseases

It has been observed during last few decades, diseases in crops occurred in 
high intensity tremendously and great advancement also have been seen in disease 

14

management practices. Diseases can be managed by several advance practices like 
cultural, physical, chemical, biological, breeding, biotechnological, tissue culture and 
molecular methods. It is also observed that ancient and modern researches against 
plant diseases with their combinations can made absolute plant disease management. 
Each and every method has some merits and demerits. Therefore use of suitable 
techniques and methods in combinations to manage disease below economic injury 
level which is known as “Integrated Disease Management (IDM)”. The Principles 
of diseases management are the main stem of Integrated Disease Management. The 
principles behind in IDM approach are Exclusion, Avoidance, Protection, eradication, 
Host resistance and chemotherapy

Strategies and Tactics: The definitions of the strategies generally an overall plan 
for reaching a particular objective is called a strategy. Strategy is a path why which 
the object of disease management can be achieve or in other words steps involved in 
the sequence to get the perfect  disease management of particular crop or particular 
disease in an area we can called as strategies. Strategies may involve many steps like 
supervision, monitoring Avoidance, chemical treatment, sowing times, seed treatments 
etc. but the important thing is the decision when and where these component can 
be applied. While the specific means for implementing a given strategy are called 
tactics. Any endeavor that requires a series of connected tasks for its completion also 
requires some kind of overall plan. Each individual task, no matter how skillfully 
executed or how successful its outcome, will not advance progress toward the final 
objective unless it has a coherent relationship with all of the other necessary tasks.

Principles of Integrated Disease Management 

Studies on etiology, symptoms, pathogenesis and epidemiology of plant diseases are 
interesting and scientifically justified but it is very important that they are helpful in 
development of methods for successful management of plant disease. The practices 
of disease management vary from one disease to another depending upon the type 
of host and pathogen. Principles of plant disease control were first classified by 
Whetzel (1929) into exclusion, eradication, protection and immunization. Later in 
advancement and development of new methods of strategies of plant disease control 
two principles - avoidance and therapy were added (NAS, 1968).

Avoidance

 The principle avoidance applied by planting at time when or in areas where, inoculums 
is absent or ineffective due to environmental conditions. The major aim is to enable 
the host to avoid contact with the pathogen or to ensure that the susceptible stage 
of the plant does not coincide with favorable conditions for the pathogen. The main 
practices under avoidance are choice of geographical area, selection of the field, 

15

choice of sowing / planting time, selection of seed and planting material, disease 
resistant varieties and modified suitable agronomic or cultural practices. For example- 
The potato cultivation at high altitude is relatively free from viruses; as prevailing 
environmental conditions do not permit the buildup of vector populations. Similarly, 
early planting of potato or wheat, in indo Gangetic plains may escape late blight or 
stem rust damage respectively.

Exclusion

This principle Exclusion is preventing introduction of new disease causing agent or 
pathogen from invading in new or uninfected areas/region, farm, or planting material 
where inoculum absent and contact between pathogen and crop should also be avoid. 
It is nothing but prevention that inoculums should not be enter or established in 
a field where it does not in existence. Some of the means like Seed certification, 
inspection, eradication of inoculums, eradication of vectors, and quarantine measures 
are used to prevent the spread of pathogens. 

Eradication 

The termed as eradication is a principle to minimize and elimination or destroying 
inoculums from the source, either from a region or an individual plant where it 
is already established. One of the most extensive eradication operations carried 
out during 1927- 35 in the USA for management of citrus canker (Xanthomonas 
axonopodis) in which 4 million citrus trees were cut and burnt to eradicate the 
pathogen. The alternate and / or collateral hosts, crop rotations, field sanitations, 
heat treatment or chemical treatments of planting materials or soil fumigation etc.
can be applied under this eradication practices.

Protection 

Resistance 

In case of the principles of avoidance, exclusion and eradication cannot be applied 
to prevent the pathogen infection for many fast spreading infectious pathogens, 
brought by wind or irrigation from associated fields or any other distant place of 
survival. So that it can be achieved by using toxic barriers between the host surface 
and the pathogen. The application of chemical sprays, dusting, application nutrients, 
host management, vector management may be applied.

Resistance to diseases is also a genetically controlled character under this principle 
we can utilizes cultivars that are resistant or tolerant to infection. The concept of 
vertical and horizontal resistance was suggested by Vander Plank in 1968.  Disease 
resistance may also be defined as the capacity of the host to defend itself against 
pathological processes or the agents of those processes. All most all the case of diseases 

16

resistance, infection or certain degree of establishment of pathogen takes place. 
Usually resistance can reduce the degree of establishment, rate of spore production 
and colonization. Resistance is the ability of a plant to reduce the growth and or 
the development of the parasite after contact has been initiated or established. It 
utilizes in-built mechanism to resist various activities of pathogen. The basic breeding 
techniques like selection, mutation and hybridization, use of biotechnological tools 
such as tissue culture, genetic correction and fusion are being used to develop resistant. 
Resistance in host can be described of two type, vertical and horizontal resistance. 

Vertical resistance: it is a race specific, pathotype specific or simple resistance. It is 
generally determined by major genes or few specific genes and is characterized by 
pathotype specificity. In general it can manage the single disease

 Horizontal resistance is generally controlled by polygene, many genes and is 
pathotype nonspecific, common resistance. It can slow down the reproductive rate 
of the pathogen so the disease spread slowly. It is also known as race nonspecific, 
partial or general resistance. In case of horizontal resistance, it can covers or control 
more than one disease. The horizontal resistance is the natural resistance where most 
of the pathogen occurs in low virulence. 

Monogenic: It is controlled by specific single gene. This type possesses high resistance 
to a given strain or race of the pathogen but it is susceptible to other races. 

Polygenic: It is controlled by many genes and is not so high but at the same time 
does not easily breakdown due to the evolution of new races. This is also referred 
to as durable resistance. 

Therapy  

Therapy is a curative procedure to protect plants that are already infected or is 
applied to individuals after infection. It is used on individual plants and cannot be 
used on a large scale. It can be achieved by treating the plant with some chemicals, 
antibiotics, and metabolites etc. that inactivate the pathogen. a principle of plant 
disease control, it provides an opportunity to cure or rejuvenate the diseased host 
plant by use of physical or chemical agents.

Chemotherapy is the use of chemicals to inactivate the pathogen, whereas heat is 
sometimes used to inactivate or inhibit virus development in infected plant tissues 
and heat may also kill the pathogen is known as Thermotherapy.

Components of integrated disease management 

IDM is currently defined as: “a sustainable approach to managing diseases by 
combining biological, cultural, physical and chemical tools in a way that minimizes 

17

economic, health and environmental risks”. Accordingly, the major components of 
integrated disease management summarized here are: Quarantine and Regulatory 
measures, Cultural control, Physical and mechanical control, chemical control, 
biological control and Host resistance. Even though these components will be 
dealt with individually, it should be mentioned that often the different components 
are complementary to each other with strong interaction among them and the 
environment.

Quarantine and regulatory measures 

Plant quarantine is defined as the legal enforcement measures aimed to prevent 
the spread of disease from the area where they have already gained entry and have 
established in new restricted areas, by the restriction on movement of planting 
materials. As a principle, quarantine is one of the most effective weapons against plant 
diseases. Quarantine is classified into three categories, namely Domestic, International 
and Embargo quarantine. Under the DIP Act, the Directorate of Plant Protection, 
Quarantine and storage has the responsibility to take the necessary steps and regulate 
the inter-state movement of plants and plant material in order to prevent the further 
spread of destructive insects and diseases that have already entered the country. Most 
of the states in India have plant quarantine laws to avoid entry of plant pests and 
diseases. There are many limitations to implementing domestic plant quarantine in 
India due to the vastness of the country and the unrestricted movement of plant 
material from one state to another. For implementation of quarantine regulation at 
the international level, proper check is maintained at the points of entry at airports 
and seaports. At present plant quarantine regulations differ with different countries 
for major agricultural commodities that are being exported out of India. 

Cultural practices:

Cultural practices play an important role in plant disease prevention and management. 
The benefits of cultural control begin with the establishment of a growing environment 
that favors the crop over the pathogen. Reducing plant stress through environmental 
modification promotes good plant health and aids in reducing damage from some 
plant diseases. 

 » Deep ploughing of the field results in exposure of propagules to elevated 
temperatures and physical killing of the pathogen. This can be regarded as 
dry soil solarization. 

 »

Flooding of the field somewhat resembles soil disinfestations. Long-term 
summer soil flooding, with or without paddy culture is found to be decreased 
populations of soil borne pathogens. 

18

 »

 »

Sanitation practices aimed at excluding, reducing, or eliminating pathogen 
populations are critical for management of infectious plant diseases. It is 
important to use only pathogen-free transplants. 

In order to reduce dispersal of soil borne pathogens between fields, stakes 
and farm equipment should be decontaminated before moving from one 
field to the next. Reduction of pathogen survival from one season to another 
may be achieved by crop rotation and destroying volunteer plants.

Physical and mechanical measures: 

Mechanical and physical Practices can kill pathogens directly or make the environment 
unsuitable for it. The common methods are: 

1.  Collect and destroy the disease infected plant parts. 

2.  Soil sterilization at 50-60ºC for about 30 min kills the all soil borne pathogens. 

3.  Some seed borne diseases like loose smut of wheat (52ºC for 11 min), leaf scald 
(50ºC for 2-3h), red rot (54ºC for 8 h) and ratoon stunting of sugarcane (50ºC 
for 3h), black rot of crucifer (50 ºC for 20-30 min) etc. can be treated by hot 
water treatment by immersing infected seeds in hot water at recommended 
temperature and time. 

4.  Hot air treatment is given to remove excess of moisture from plant organs and 
protect them from fungal and bacterial attack. Several virus infected dormant 
plants are treated by hot air treatment at a temperature ranging from 35-54ºC 
for 8 h.

Chemical control 

Chemical control is widely used to maintain green leaf area and increase grain yield. 
Fungicide treatment has been found to be effective when the infection level is visually 
more than 5% of the leaf area (Cook et al.1999). The economical benefit should be 
achieved from proper timing of reduced fungicide doses, which give substantial 
increases in net yield and cost-effectiveness. Another strategy is the proper choice of 
fungicide; its dose and application time are important in achieving economic efficacy. 
Seed treatment is one aspect of crop management. It is an advanced and economic 
delivery system to protect the genetic potential of the seed against diseases from the 
moment of sowing and also partial replacement of the conventional foliar application. 
Seed treatments with fungicides have antagonistic activity against pathogenic fungi 
on seed-borne and root rot diseases and are capable of suppressing root rots as well 
as other plant diseases. 

More recently, new classes of fungicides were developed with significant 

19

impact on disease control. These include anilinopyrimidines, phenoxyquinolines, 
oxazolidinediones, spiroketalamines, phenylpyrroles, strobilurins and activators of 
systemic acquired resistance. However, the development of pathogen populations 
showing reduced sensitivity to many of the newly developed products posed a serious 
challenge that the traditional fungicides 

Biological control

Success in using microorganisms against plant pathogens started with the control 
of crown gall with Agrobacterium radiobacter K84 (Kerr,1980), and that of seedling 
blights caused by Pythium and Rhizoctonia with Trichoderma harizanum (Harman and 
Bjorkman, 1998), Gliocaladium virens (Lumsden and Walter, 1995) and Streptomyces 
griseus (Cook et al., 1996). However, the use of naturally occurring bio-control agents 
(antagonists) of plant pathogens can be traced back to many centuries through 
the traditional practice of crop rotations that primarily permit the reduction of 
pathogens’ inoculum potential in the soil below injury level. Cross protection is 
also a one of the modern bio- control method for the disease management. In this 
method mild strain of virus or microorganisms is inoculated in host plant. These 
provide protection of host plants from those viruses and microorganisms which may 
cause much more severe damage e.g. papaya ring spot disease, citrus tristiza disease, 
etc. One of the limitations of using bio control agents is their inability to survive 
in certain field conditions. However, bio control agents have the ability to improve 
disease management when integrated with other management options.

Some of the benefits of an integrated approach are as follows:

Promotes sound structures and healthy plants

 »
 »
Promotes the sustainable bio based disease management alternatives.
 » Reduces the environmental risk associated with management by encouraging 

the adoption of more ecologically benign control tactics
 » Reduces the potential for air and ground water contamination
 »

Protects the non-target species through reduced impact of plant disease 
management activities.

 » Reduces the need for pesticides and fungicides by using several management 

methods

 » Reduces or eliminates issues related to pesticide residue
 » Reduces or eliminates re-entry interval restrictions
 » Decreases workers, tenants and public exposure to chemicals

20

programs

Conclusion

 » Alleviates concern of the public about pest & pesticide related practices.
 » Maintains  or  increases  the  cost-effectiveness  of  disease  management 

The disease occurs in plant is by biotic and abiotic means and causes a significant loss 
in agriculture system. The success and sustainability of IDM strategy, especially with 
resource poor farmers greatly depends on their involvement in helping to generate 
locally specific techniques and solutions suitable for their particular farming systems 
and integrating control components. The success and sustainability of IDM strategy, 
especially with resource poor farmers greatly depends on their involvement in helping 
generate locally specific techniques and solutions suitable for their particular farming 
systems and integrating control components that are ecologically sound and readily 
available to them. Integrated disease management is the practice of using a range of 
measures to prevent and manage diseases in crops. Hazard analysis is used to identify 
the potential for infection so that preventative or curative measures can be put in 
place to minimize the risk of disease infection and spread. During the cropping cycle, 
regular crop monitoring is used to decide if and what action is needed. Integrated 
Disease Management is one of the best solutions for mitigate the disease in vegetable 
crops through cultural, biological, mechanical and chemical methods. 

References

Cook RJ, Hims MJ, Vaughan TB. Effects of fungicide spraytiming on winter wheat 

disease control. Plant Pathology, 1999, 48, 33-50. 

Cook  RJ,  Bruckart  WL,  Coulson  JR,  Goettel  MS,  Humber  RA.  Safety  of 
microorganisms intended for pestand plant disease control: a framework for 
scientific evaluation. Biological Control, 1996, 7, 333-351. 

FAO, 2004. FAOSTAT: FAO statistical data bases. Rome, Italy (http://faostat.fao.org). 

Harman GE, Bjorkman T. Potential and existing uses of Trichoderma and Gliocladium 
for plant disease control and growth enhancement. In: Harmon G.E., Kubicek 
C.P.(eds). Trichoderma and Gliocladium, Enzymes, Biological Control and 
Commercial Applications, 1998; 2:229-265. 

Khoury, W. El. and Makkouk, K. 2010. Integrated plant disease management in 
developing countries. J Plant Pathol, 92 (4, Supplement): S4.35-S4.42. 

Kerr A. Biological control of crown gall through production of agrocin 84. Plant 

Disease,1980; 64:25-30.

21

Kakraliya SS, Abrol Sonali, Choskit D, and Pandit Devanshi. Integrated Disease 
Management in Agriculture. www.justagriculture.in,  Vol.1 Issue-3, November 
2020. 

Kumar V, Ram RB, Meena ML, Shukla V and Singh C. Integrated disease management 
through organic farming in Vegetable crops in india: a sustainable tool. Asian 
Academic Research Journal of Multi-Disciplinary 2013, Volume-1, Issue-7. 

Lumsden RD, Walter JF. Development of biocontrolfungus Gliocladiumvirens: risk 
assessment and approvalfor horticultural use. In: Hokkanen M.T., Lynch J.M. 
(eds).Biological Control: Benefits and Risks, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, 1995; 263-269. 

Pandey  AK,  Sain  SK,  and  Singh  Pooja.A  Perspective  on  Integrated  Disease 

Management in Agriculture. Bio Bulletin (2016), Vol. 2(2): 13-29. 

Park D. Antagonism the background to soil fungi. In: The Ecology of Soil Fungi 
Parkinson, D. and Waid J S. Liverpool, Liverpool University Press, 1960, 154-160.

Pauliz TZ. Low Input No-till Cereal Production in the Pacific Northwest of the 
U.S. The Challenges of Root Diseases. European Journal of Plant Pathology. 
2006; 115:271-281. 

Rasool K, Rasool F, Bhat N A, Mushtaq N, Wani TA, Alam S, Sushil Kumar, Saxena 
A, Bhat S, and Yousuf Shanaz.  IDM: A new approach to disease management. 
Int. J. Chem. Sci.Volume 2; Issue 2; March 2018; Page No. 07-11 

Thurston H.D., 1990. Plant disease management practices of traditional farmers. 

Plant Disease 74: 96-101.

Thurston H.D., 1992. Sustainable Practices for Plant Disease Management in 

Traditional Farming Systems. Western Press, Boulder, CO, USA.

Tripathi L., Mwangi M., Abele S., Aritua V., Tushemereirwe W., Bandyopadhyay R., 
2009. Xanthomonas wilt: A threat to banana production in East and Central 
Africa. Plant Disease 93: 440-449.

waddington S.R., Li X., Dixon J.,Hyman G., de Vicente C., 2010. Getting the focus 
right:  production constraints for six major food crops in Asian and African 
farming systems. Food Security 2: 27-48. 

Whetzel, H. H.1929. The terminology of phytopathology. hoc. 2nd Int. Congr. 

Plant Sci, Ithaca 2:1204-15

22

3

Abstract

Plant Pathology and Crop Losses: 

Economic Impact and Management

Dharani Sureshkumar1 and Priyadharshini Eswaran2
1Ph.D.Scholar, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore - 641003 (Tamil Nadu) 
2Ph.D.Scholar, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore - 641003 (Tamil Nadu)

The pathogens responsible for the diseases of crop plants cause a serious problem in 
terms of economy and also human health problems. These diseases are deadly that 
it could drastically reduce the yield under favourable conditions and also produces 
deadly chemicals which on intake can lead to death of humans. The economic losses 
due to diseases were estimated to be 12 to 14% and the post-harvest losses caused 
by pathogens were estimated to be 4.61 to 15.9%. Researches have been carried out 
since to control the diseases and increase the yield for the sake of economy and also 
for the well-being of people. In this chapter, the economic impact of the diseases 
and the management strategies developed so far have been discussed in detail.

Keywords: Economic impact, disease management, fungal disease, bacterial disease, 
viral diseases 

Introduction

Plant diseases substantially minimise the yields of food crops, which has downstream 
repercussions for human health as well as loss of species variety and mitigation 
costs associated with control techniques. In many parts of the world, outbreaks of 
plant diseases are on upward trajectory and pose a threat to those who rely on food 
security. At the moment, a worldwide epidemic is endangering the health of millions 
of people worldwide. The agroecosystem favours the emergence of new, host-specific, 
“domesticated” crop pathogens that evolve more quickly and are more virulent than 
their “wild” ancestors. This is because agroecosystems have homogeneous genetic and 

23

physical environments, which create a selective environment that is very different 
from that found in natural ecosystems. Compared to natural ecosystems, agro-
ecosystems have higher planting densities and more genetically homogenous host 
populations, which facilitate disease transmission and boost pathogen virulence in 
the agro-ecosystem. By raising the overall number of mutations available in agro-
ecosystems and decreasing the effects of genetic drift, these variables also increase 
the size of the pathogen effective population, resulting in more pathogen genetic 
diversity.

To help people out of poverty and improve health outcomes, a reliable, healthy 
food supply will be necessary. Climate change, transmission through international 
food trade networks, pathogen propagation, and the emergence of novel pathogen 
lineages are all contributing to the spread and aggravation of plant diseases, both 
endemic and recently developing (Ristanio et al., 2021). Plant disease epidemics are 
also a major threat which dates back to the Great Irish famine of 1845 to 1852 in 
Ireland. Hence the cultivation and consumption of food crops, as well as the social 
and political   stability of nations, are all severely impacted by plant diseases, which 
are a global problem.

In order to meet the growing demand for food’s quality and quantity, plant 
protection   in general and the ability of crops to defend against plant diseases 
in particular, are clearly important. Eradiction of the pathogen is not completely 
possible and hence management is the best possible way. To provide a consistent and 
ongoing supply of marketable produce for the expanding global population, disease 
management is of paramount importance. The increased use of chemicals in disease 
control has had a negative influence on environmental quality and led to an increase 
in the number of plants that are chemically resistant. The application of increasingly 
more biological control agents appears to be the only technology that has promise for 
managing diseases without upsetting the equilibrium of the harmful and beneficial 
composition of the environment and ecosystem (Kumar et al., 2014). The new era of 
agronanotechnology has its roots in nanoscale science and nanotechnologies, which 
have the potential to transform food and agricultural systems.

Economic Impact Caused by Plant Pathogens

Plant pathogens impair agricultural production’s productivity and quality. At the 
household, national, and international levels, they result in significant economic 
losses and reduce food security. It is challenging to compile and compare quantitative, 
standardised data on agricultural losses across crops, agroecosystems, and geographic 
regions. Disease injuries brought on by epidemics may result in crop loss (damage), 
which may then result in economic loss.

24

  Crop diseases can coexist with more hosts in agro-ecosystems, increasing 
the possibility that multiple genotypes (strains) of the same pathogen will infect the 
same plant at the same time. Due to competition among strains for the same host 
resources, multiple infections also support the development of increased virulence. 
Due to competition among pathogen species for the same host resources, the increased 
host and pathogen density found in agro-ecosystems enhances the possibility of 
co-infection by diverse pathogen species, which also favours higher virulence. The 
possibility of horizontal gene transfer is also increased by co-infection with various 
disease species, as has been shown for several crop infections that have acquired 
genes altering virulence, sometimes from other pathogens infecting the same host. 
This co existence has even increased the problem of crop loss and ecnomic crisis.

In order to meet the rising demand for food in terms of both quality and quantity, 
plant protection in general and crop protection against plant diseases in particular 
are obviously important. Around 20 to 40% of worldwide agricultural production 
is lost as a result of direct yield losses brought on by pathogens, animals, and weeds. 
Crop losses brought on by pests and pathogens can be direct or indirect; they come 
in many forms, some of which have short-term and some long-term effects. The 
main goal of plant protection at that time was to shield crops from production losses 
brought on by both biological and non-biological factors. The issue is still difficult 
today as it was in the 20th century, and the limited environmental, economic, and 
social leeway creates further complication.

Presently it is estimated that postharvest fruit loss caused by phytopathogen 
fungus accounts for more than 50% of all agricultural fruit production (Zhang et al., 
2017). Fresh fruit and vegetable post-harvest losses in India range from 4.61 to 15.9%. 
( Jha et al., 2015). In a study conducted by Savary et al., (2019) they documented the 
yield loss due to various pathogens and pests in important food crops like wheat, 
rice, maize, potato and soybean worldwide. The estimated results showed that 21.5% 
loss in wheat crop caused mainly due to diseases like  leaf rust (Puccinia triticina), 
Fusarium head blight (FHB)/scab (Fusarium graminearum), tritici blotch (Septoria 
tritici), stripe rust (Puccinia striiformis f. sp. tritici), spot blotch (Cochliobolus sativus), 
tan spot (Pyrenophora tritici-repentis) and powdery mildew (Erysiphe graminis).

In rice the loss was upto 30% caused by diseases like sheath blight caused by 
Rhizoctonia solani, blast caused by Magnoporthe oryzae, brown spot caused by Cochliobolus 
miyabeanus and bacterial blight caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv.oryzae. Maize 22.5% 
yield loss was recorded which was due to diseases such as Fusarium and Gibberella stalk 
rots (Fusarium graminearum), northern leaf blight (Exserohilum turcicum), Fusarium 
and Gibberella ear rots, anthracnose stalk rot (Colletotrichum graminicola) and southern 
rust(Puccinia sorghi). Pathogens like Phytopthora infestans causing late blight, brown 

25

rot caused by Ralstonia solanacearum, Alternaria solani which causes early blight and 
cyst nematode reduces 17.2% yield loss in potato. 21.4% yield loss was observed in 
soybean due to pathogens causing white mould (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum), soybean 
rust (Phakopsora pachyrhizi), Cercospora leaf blight (Cercospora kikuchii), brown spot 
(Septoria glycines) and charcoal rot (Macrophomina phaseolina)

Fungal Diseases and their Management

Few species (less than 10% of all recognised fungi) of the known fungal species 
are stringent saprophytes, indicating they cannot colonise plants. An even smaller 
portion of these plant immigrants are phytopathogenic fungi. Phytopathogenic 
fungi, however, not only consistently and substantially decrease crop yield annually, 
but they are the primary cause of disastrous agricultural plant epidemics among 
phytopathogens. Due to these issues of practical importance, scientists, plant breeders, 
and farmers all combat phytopathogenic fungus (Gonzalez-Fernandez et al., 2010).

1. Cultural methods for the control of plant fungal diseases:

i) Crop rotation 

The growing of economic plants in repeating succession and in a specific order on 
the same piece of land is known as crop rotation, as opposed to a one-crop system, 
which typically lacks a clear strategy. Crop rotation involving maize, soybean, and 
wheat has reduced F. graminearum infection in soybean (Marburger et al., 2015).

ii) Irrigation 

The cultivator has a variety of options for water management, including timing, 
frequency, volume and manner of irrigation, to lower both foliar and soil-borne 
disease. Numerous times, knowing the needs for aeration and moisture in each biotic 
element contributing to the disease, enables the selection of a compromise watering 
schedule, which agricultural production that is reasonable or ideal yet nonetheless less 
conducive to the spread of disease. Consequently, the ideal irrigation schedule for a 
crop in a soil that is not infected may be different from that in a pathogen-infested 
soil. Gummy stem blight (Didymella bryoniae) and downy mildew (Pseudoperonospora 
cubensis) are some of the devastating diseases of watermelon which could be possible 
influenced by changing the irrigation schedule (dos Santos et al., 2013) 

iii) Soil solarisation

The soil is heated by sun energy in this preplanting cultural practise for soil deinfestation. 
The soil is heated by covering it with clear plastic sheeting at the right times of year, 
which also controls numerous pathogens and weeds. The dominant species of Fusarium 

26

such as F. solani, F. oxysporum, F. pseudograminearum, F. moniliforme and F. sambucinum 
has shown to have reduced population density under this method (Saremi et al., 2011).

2. Chemicals for the control of plant fungal diseases:

Chemicals are a crucial component of successful integrated pest management (IPM) 
programmes for controlling plant diseases. In the middle of the 1800s, lime sulphur and 
Bordeaux combination were introduced, and in the first half of the 1900s, fungicides 
with various sites of action and protective and contact characteristics against a number 
of target sites in fungal metabolism played a significant role. In the 1960s, fungicides 
that block a particular target site were developed. Numerous specialised fungicides 
were widely used up until recently due to their wide application windows, systemic 
activity, and protective and curative characteristics (Morton and Staub 2008). 

Based on the mode of action commercial fungicides has been classified into 
various groups such as Sterol biosynthesis inhibitors (SBIs), quinone outside 
inhibitors (QoI), Dithiocarbamates, Benzimidazoles and thiophanates, Succinate 
dehydrogenase inhibitors (SDHIs), Chloronitriles, Phenylamides, Carboxylic acid 
amides (CAAs), Anilinopyrimidines etc. (Hirooka and Ishii 2013). Chemical 
fungicides are mostly used in commercial agriculture to protect crop plants from 
fungal infections by obliterating and suppressing their cells and spores. Their low cost 
and ease of usage, however, lead to their overuse or repeated applications (Youssef 
et al., 2019). This improper or excessive use of fungicides has had a negative impact 
on the environment, human and animal health, and beneficial biological systems. 
Furthermore, it is getting harder and harder to cure plant fungal diseases due to the 
advent of resistant strains of fungus phytopathogens. 

3. Biological control of plant fungal diseases:

Biological control of plant diseases is the concealment of populaces of plant pathogens 
by living organisms (Heimpel and Mills 2017). The term “biological control” refers 
to the intentional use of biotic organisms that have been introduced into an area or 
that already exist there, such as disease-resistant host plants, to reduce the activity 
and population of one or more plant diseases (Pal and Gardener, 2006). Because 
microbial biopesticides are a crucial and invaluable component of integrated pest 
management (IPM), there is a growing interest in selecting them as the basis for the 
development of biological control agents (BCAs) (Matyjaszczyk 2015). Although 
microorganisms (bacteria, fungi, and viruses) are currently financially available to 
manage plant diseases and pests (Montesinos and Bonaterra 2017), the effectiveness 
of the biological products may change between preliminary results or deteriorate in 
field conditions (Sundin et al., 2009). 

27

Wide array of fungi and bacterial has been used as a biocontrol agent for 
suppressing the fungal diseases. The effective implementation of biocontrol can be 
credited with an array of elements, such as the microbial inoculants’ rhizosphere 
competence, interactions with the natural microbiota, the ability to compete for 
nutrients, adaptation to changes in the environment, and increased host plant defence 
against pathogens (Pal and Gardener 2006). In addition to being incredibly helpful 
for managing disease, biological control is also extremely vital in establishing an eco-
friendly environment. The use of biological management is crucial for controlling 
plant diseases without harming the native flora and fauna. It additionally boosts soil 
fertility (Ghorbanpour et al., 2018). 

Some of the bacteria listed below has been used as a bacterial biocontrol 
agents which are Acinetobacter, Agrobacterium, Alcaligenes, Arthrobacter, Azospirillum, 
Azotobacter, Bacillus, Bradyrhizobium, Frankia, Pantoea, Pseudomonas, Rhizobium, 
Serratia, Stenotrophomonas, Streptomyces and Thiobacillus (Tariq et al., 2020). Increasing 
the activity of defense-related enzymes like peroxidase, polyphenol oxidase, and 
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL), producing antagonistic compounds, and 
altering specific root exudates like polysaccharides and amino acids are all ways that 
endophytic bacteria like Bacillus spp. and P. fluorescens can induce systemic resistance 
in plants against pathogens (Table 1). 

A vast majority of the sections of fungi are physiologically and meticulously 
organised to prevent the growth of other pathogenic fungi that are detrimental to the 
advancement and development of plants. The creation of fungal strains as biocontrol 
agents for plant diseases has received a lot of attention. Those from the genus Trichoderma 
have been examined the most frequently (Table 2). Penicillium, Gliocladium, Aspergillus 
and Saccharomyces are also used as biocontrol agent against some of the major class 
of fungus like oomycetes and ascomycetes (Pal and Gardener 2006). Biofumigation, 
use of essential oil, utilization of antagonistic micro-organisms in suppressive soil and 
botanical fungicides are some of the approaches of biological control.

Table 1: Beneficial bacterial strains which act as biocontrol agents against 
phytopathogenic fungi

S.No Bacterial Strains

1
2
3
4

Bacillus subtilis 
Bacillus thuringiensis
Pseudomonas fluorescens Apple/Mucor rot
Rhizobium japonicum Soybean/Root rot

Test Plant/Disease Target Pathogen
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum
Oil seed rape
Brassica campestris L. Sclerotinia sclerotiorum

Mucor piriformis
Fusarium solani; 
Macrophomina phaseolina

28

1

2
3

4
5

5

Bacillus licheniformis 

Pepper

Phytophthora capsici

Source: Tariq et al., 2020

Table 2: Beneficial fungal strains which act as biocontrol agents against 
phytopathogenic fungi

S.No Fungal Strains

Penicillium oxalicum 

Test Plant/Disease Target Pathogen
Tomato/wilt

Trichoderma atroviride 
Trichoderma spp. 

Beans
Tobacco/root rot

Trichoderma asperellum
Trichoderma harzianum

Onion
Rice/brown spot

Sclerotium cepivorum
Bipolaris oryzae

Fusarium  oxysporum  f. 
sp. lycopersici
Botrytis cinerea
Rhizoctonia solani

Source: Tariq et al., 2020

4. Agriculture nanotechnology for the control of fungal diseases:

The biological effects of already-in-use antimicrobial agents are being rediscovered 
through nanotechnology research by manipulating their size to alter their effect. 
Pathogenic bacterial, fungal, and viral organisms were controlled using a variety of 
inorganic and organic antimicrobial nanoparticles (Mohamed et al., 2021). Products 
made with nanomaterials, such as nano-fertilizers or nano-pesticides, have been used 
into agricultural practises recently. Nanoparticles, particularly metallic ones, have 
recently been created using biological resources like microbes, plant extracts, marine 
organisms, and microfluids. The most stable, cost-effective, and environmentally 
friendly nanoparticles are those produced using “green synthesis” employing primary 
and secondary metabolites of plant extracts (Baky and Amara 2021). 

Silver nanoparticles, zinc oxide nanoparticles, gold nanoparticles and copper 
nanoparticles are some examples of nanoparticles that represent green nanotechnology 
application in fungal management along with their targeted pathogens. Krishnaraj 
et al., (2012) reported the antifungal activity of Acalypha indica leaf extract for rapid 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles at a concentration of 15 mg against a number 
of phytopathogenic fungi, including  Rhizoctonia solani, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, 
Alternaria alternata, Botrytis cinerea, Macrophomina phaseolina and Curvularia 
lunata. The potential of these nanoparticles to suppress Fusarium graminearum by 
limiting its mycelial growth and mycotoxin production was proven by Lakshmeesha 
et al., (2019), who reported biofabrication of ZnO NPs utilising buds extract of 
Syzygium aromaticum flowers. Jayaseelan et al., (2013) in their study stated the role 

29

of gold nanoparticles synthesized by the seeds of Abelmoschus esculentus aqueous 
extract which had fungicidal effects on important phytopathogens Aspergillus niger, 
Aspergillus flavus and Puccinia graminis var. tritci. Citrus medica was used in the green 
synthesis of copper nanoparticles by Shende et al., (2015), who also demonstrated the 
inhibitory effects of these nanoparticles on Fusarium oxysporum, Fusarium culmorum 
and Fusarium graminearum.

The use of ultraviolet light for the eradication of plant fungal infections is among 
other management strategies that were considered to be of future relevance. AMF’s 
(arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi) impact on plant defence mechanisms against fungi, 
Mycoviruses to limit the virulence of phytopathogenic fungi, homoeopathy and tea 
derived from herbal flowers for controlling phytopathogenic fungi, increasing plant 
resistance to fungal illnesses, and fungal cell deactivation and evacuation employing 
ghost techniques are some other methods (Baky and Amara 2021).

Bacterial Diseases and their Management

1. Cultural methods

i.  Crop rotation

Crop rotation is a cultural method of disease management which is based on growing 
a series of crops in the successive seasons in order to minimise the host range of the 
pathogens and starve them to death. The brown rot of potato caused by Ralstonia 
solanacearum was found to be controlled by crop rotation with cabbage or lablab or 
cereals like wheat (Mwaniki, 2017).

ii.  Selection of resistant varieties

The resistant varieties which can withstand the pathogen attack can be selected to 
avoid the infection caused by the pathogens. Till now many resistant varieties were 
developed and were released in India. Some of the varieties resistant to bacterial 
blight of cotton caused by Xanthomonas campestris pv. malvacearum are MCU 10, L 
389, L 604, LAHH 4, Arogya (Waghmare, 2016) and the variety IR24 is resistant 
to bacterial blight of rice cause by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Zhang, 2022). The 
varieties reported to be resistant against Pseudomonas rubrilineans causing red stripe 
of sugarcane were Co cultivars 6805, 7537, 7202 (Singh, 2018a).

iii.  Inoculum free seeding or planting material

The first and foremost step in disease management is to select the disease free seeds 
or planting material. The tundu disease of wheat caused by the combination of 
Clavibacter tritici and Anguina tritici produces galls which can be easily mixed with 
the seeds and have to be removed before sowing the seeds to ensure that the disease 

30

free seeds were sown. Likewise, the black rot of crucifers caused by Xanthomonas 
campestris pv. campestris is a seed borne disease which can be controlled by sowing 
the seeds after seed health testing in laboratories (Gitaitis & Walcott, 2007).

iv.  Crop sanitation

Crop sanitation is an important practice for disease management where the suspected 
diseased plant parts are removed continuously during the cropping season. Rouging 
of the infected plant parts and the weed hosts come under the crop sanitation. For e.g. 
In the case of citrus canker and the citrus greening diseases which is caused by the 
bacteria, Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Singh, 2018b) and Candidatus liberobacter 
asiaticum (Gottwald, 2007) respectively, the infected plants or the plant parts should 
be removed immediately from the field to control the spreading of the disease.

v.  Amendment of organic manures to the soil

One of the most cost effective methods of disease management is amending soil with 
the organic manures like green manure crops, farmyard manure, mustard manure, 
soybean manure, swine manure, fish manure etc. These type of manures produce 
toxic compounds which have the ability to kill the pathogens (Lazarovits et al., 
2001). Apart from the disease management, these manures can provide nutrition to 
the plants and also it can alter the physical and chemical characteristics of the soil 
(Akanmu et al., 2021). For e.g., the potato plants when treated with mustard manure 
showed reduced disease incidence of common scab disease caused by Streptomyces 
scabies (Gharate et al., 2016). 

vi.  Adjustment in the date of sowing

The date of sowing of the crops can be adjusted to avoid the critical stage of infection 
and the favourable environmental conditions so that the plant escapes disease. In 
case of cotton, it was observed that yield loss occurs during late planting and yield 
is increased during early planting (Afzal et al., 2020). And so, the early planted 
cotton escapes from the bacterial blight disease caused by Xanthomonas axonopodis 
pv. malvacearum (Singh, 2018b).

vii.  Management of acidity / alkalinity of the soil

Many pathogens can grow in the type of soils in which their host plants grow. But 
some pathogens are sensitive to the pH and cannot grow when the pH of the soil 
is manipulated. For e.g., the potato scab pathogen, Streptomyces scabies is sensitive 
when the pH is lowered to 5.2 (Hamedo & Makhlouf, 2013) and so application of 
gypsum or sulphur to lower the pH below 5.2 effectively reduces the severity of the 
disease (Goswami & Mishra, 2022).

31

viii. Management of host nutrition

The nutrients supplied to the plants also plays a major role in plant resistance or 
susceptibility. High nitrogen sometimes induce the vegetative growth of the plants and 
ir favours the disease development. The bacterial blight and bacterial streak diseases 
of rice caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Chao et al., 2015) and X. oryzae 
pv. oryzicola (Singh, 2018b) and bacterial speck of tomato caused by Pseudomonas 
syringae pv. tomato infects the plants which were provided with high levels of nitrogen 
(Hoffland et al., 2000). The disease, black rot of crucifers caused by X. campestris pv. 
campestris can be reduced by applying boron alone or with nitrogen (Singh, 2018b).

2. Mechanical methods - Sieving of galls and water floating / sedimentation 
methods

The seed galls produced in the ear cockle / tundu disease of wheat can be easily mixed 
with the seeds and act as inoculum for the next season. It should be removed before 
sowing and the methods used to separate galls from seeds are sieving of seeds, using 
brine solution or water floatation methods. In water floatation method, the seeds 
are soaked for 10 – 15 minutes in water and the cockles which are light weighted 
will float on the top and can be removed. Another method is the seeds are soaked 
in 20 – 30 % brine/ common salt solution and the cockles are floated on the top 
which can be removed (Navik & Varshney, 2017).

3. Physical methods

i.  Hot water treatment

Hot water treatment is usually followed to eradicate the seed borne inoculum and 
thereby controlling seed borne pathogens before sowing. The bacterial blight pathogen 
X. oryzae pv. oryzae can be controlled by hot water treatment at 52 - 55⁰C for 20 – 30 
minutes (Saha et al., 2015). X. campestris pv. campestris causes black rot of cabbage 
can be controlled by hot water treatment at 50⁰C for 20 – 30 minutes. Ratoon 
stunting disease of sugarcane caused by Clavibacter xyli ssp. xyli can be controlled 
by treating the setts in hot water at 50⁰C for 3 hours (Chaube and Pundhir, 2005).

ii.  Hot air treatment

This method is also used to reduce the seed borne inoculum and seed injury is less 
in this method compared to hot water treatment. The hot air treatment of sugarcane 
stalks at 54⁰C for 8 hours is followed to control ratoon stunting disease (Chaube 
and Pundhir, 2005).

iii.  Aerated steam therapy

Aerated steam therapy is mainly followed to control the seed borne pathogens and 

32

it is safer than hot water treatment (Kiran et al., 2021). This method is followed to 
control the sugarcane ratoon stunting disease and sugarcane grassy shoot disease 
if the stalks are treated at 50⁰C for 1 hour (Parameswari & Viswanathan, 2021). 
This method is also followed for the control of citrus greening disease (Chaube and 
Pundhir, 2005).

4. Biological methods

i.  Application of biocontrol agents

Biological control using biocontrol agents is another effective method of disease 
management in which the beneficial organisms are used to suppress the harmful 
pathogens in the soil, seed surface, foliar parts etc. The mechanism of biocontrol 
agents are antibiosis, competition for nutrients, hyperparasitism and induction of 
systemic resistance of the plants. For e.g., seed treatment with Pseudomonas fluorescens 
P32 strain was found to reduce the incidence of Ralstonia solanacearum in tomato 
(Zhou et al., 2005). Seed treatment with P. fluorescens and P. putida also suppressed 
the bacterium Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. malvacearum causing bacterial blight of 
cotton in seedling stage. Bacteriophages can also be used as biocontrol agents. For 
e.g., bacteriophages belonging to Caulimovirales was found to act against the black 
leg pathogen Erwinia carotovora ssp. carotovorum (Singh, 2018a).

ii.  Application of plant extracts

Plant extracts and essential oils can be successfully exploited in disease management 
as it contains anti-fungal, anti-bacterial compounds and also it is free from residues 
and are eco-friendly. These plant extracts also serves as a nutrient source to the 
plants when degraded. It was found that 15% Datura alba plant extract suppressed 
X. axonopodis pv. malvacearum which causes bacterial blight of cotton ( Javed et al., 
2013). The crude extract of Sapium baccatum was found to be very active against 
bacterial wilt of tomato caused by Ralstonia solanacearum (Vu et al., 2017). 

5. Chemical methods

Antibiotics can be a good method to control bacterial pathogens and also a reliable 
one. Some of the antibiotics are streptomycin, tetracycline, agrimycin, oxymycin, 
terramycin etc. Streptomycin is a most common bacterial antibiotic used to control 
many plant pathogens like bacterial blight of rice and cotton. Seed treatment using 
agrimycin (0.01%) was effective against X. campestris pv. campestris which cause black 
rot of crucifers (Singh, 2018a). Seed treatment of potato tubers with thaibendazole 
1% was found to control soft rot of potato caused by E. caratovora var. atroseptica 
(Chaube and Pundhir, 2005). 

33

6. Biotechnological approaches

Recently biotechnological methods of disease management are gaining importance 
as it provides complete control of the pathogen on which the method is targeted. 
Biotechnological methods include marker assisted selection, gene pyramiding, genome 
editing and other transgenic methods. A notable variety pusa basmathi was backcrossed 
by marker assisted breeding to incorporate bacterial blight resistance genes Xa13 and 
Xa21. The resistant varieties PB1121 and PB6 developed by this method were reported 
to be completely resistant to bacterial blight of rice (Ellur et al., 2016).

Viral Diseases and their Management

1. Cultural methods

i.  Crop rotation

Crop rotation can be followed for viral disease management. Cucumber green mottle 
mosaic virus (CGMMV) infecting watermelon is a soil borne virus and when rotation 
between watermelon and rice was followed, a drastic reduction in the disease was 
observed in fields (Park et al., 2010).

ii.  Selection of resistant varieties

The blackgram variety VBN6 is resistant to Blackgram yellow mosaic virus  can be 
successfully exploited against the virus under field conditions (Kamesh krishnamoorthy 
et al., 2021). The variety Parbhani kranti was developed especially for resistance 
against yellow vein mosaic of bhendi was reported to be highly resistant to the 
disease (Islam, 2017).

iii.  Inoculum free seeding or planting material

This method is followed to ensure that the seeds were free from viruses. This is done 
by grow out tests (GOT). The grow out testing can be followed for Potato virus Y, 
Bean common mosaic virus, Pea seed borne mosaic virus, Mild mosaic viruses of potato, 
Radish yellow edge virus, etc.

iv.  Crop sanitation

Most of the viruses are vector transmitted and crop sanitation and rouging should 
be compulsorily followed to prevent the spread of infection. Potato virus X, Potato 
virus S and Potato spindle tuber viroid are the most contagious ones and rouging 
should be followed to stop the disease from spreading (Chaube and Pundhir, 2005).

v.  Plant spacing

Plant spacing also plays a major role in the transmission of viruses by vectors. 
Sometimes the crops should be planted densely or sparsely by altering the seed rate 

34

to reduce severity of the diseases. Sparse planting favours the diseases, tomato leaf 
curl transmitted by Bemesia tabaci, cucumber mosaic transmitted by Aphis gossypii and 
groundnut rosette transmitted by A. craccivora and hence dense planting is followed 
to reduce the disease incidence (Singh, 2018b).

vi.  Management of host nutrition

Excessive application of nitrogen can help plants to produce dense canopy which 
attracts the insects which transmits the viruses. Hence, recommended amount of 
nitrogen should be used to limit the insect transmission.

vii.  Intercropping

viii. Border crops

Intercropping of host crops with other non host crops can reduce the incidence of 
viruses. It was found that the blackgram intercropped with sorghum had shown 
lesser yellow mosaic incidence compared to the disease incidence in blackgram 
alone (Swathi et al., 2019).

Border crops are grown for the purpose of protecting the main crop from insect 
vectors. This method restricts the movement of insect vectors into the main crop. 
Border cropping of sorghum with blackgram as main crop controls yellow mosaic 
incidence of blackgram (Swathi et al., 2019).

2. Physical methods

i.  Hot water treatment

Hot water treatment can be followed to control diseases like Sugarcane mosaic virus, 
Sugarcane steak mosaic virus (SCSMV) etc. HWT recommended for the control of 
sugarcane mosaic virus was 52⁰C for 30 minutes (Islam, 2017) and for SCSMV 
was 53⁰C for 10 minutes (Damayanti & Putra, 2010). HWT for sugarcane grassy 
shoot disease was recommended as 50⁰C for 1 hour (Tiwari and Rao, 2023). The 
seed borne virus, tomato mosaic can be controlled by HWT at 50⁰C for 25 minutes 
(Singh, 2018a).

ii.  Hot air treatment

Hot air treatment was given by Sinclair in 1832 for the control of seed borne smut 
disease of oats and barley. Later, it was found that hot air treatment of sugarcane 
stalks at 54⁰C for 8 hours controls the grassy shoot disease of sugarcane (Singh and 
Pandey, 2012).

iii.  Aerated steam therapy

The seed borne viral diseases like sugarcane grassy shoot disease can be controlled by 

35

this method. Aerated steam therapy of single/two/three budded setts of sugarcane 
at 50⁰C for 1 hour was found to be effective against sugarcane grassy shoot disease 
(Parameswari and Viswanathan, 2021).

iv.  Moist hot air treatment

This technique is mainly followed to control sugarcane grassy shoot disease. The setts 
are first subjected to hot air at 54⁰C for 8 hours, then to aerated steam at 50⁰C for 
1 hour, and finally to moist hot air at 54⁰C for 2 hours (Singh and Pandey, 2012).

v.  Use of sticky traps

Direct vector control is accomplished by using sticky traps. This sticky traps is 
coloured so that they attract the insect vectors towards them and they stick to the 
traps and cannot move away. Thus transmission of viruses can be controlled by 
using sticky traps. The sticky traps may be yellow or blue in colour. The former is 
used for all sucking pests (aphids, whiteflies etc.) and the latter is especially used 
for attracting thrips. This is a common method for preventing the potato virus and 
CMV in peppers transmitted by aphids (Chandi, 2021).

3. Biological methods

Anti-viral extracts of many plants like coconut, sorghum, bougainvillea, Prosopis 
julifera, Cyanadon dactylon etc. are known to control viral diseases. The whole plant 
extract (WPE) of Haplophyllum tuberculatum, a medicinal plant was reported to have 
antiviral properties and was effective against Tobacco mosaic virus (Abdelkhalek et 
al., 2020). The root extracts of Mirabilis jalaba at 6% were found to be active against 
Peanut bud necrosis virus (Sangeetha, 2020). Azadirachtin, an active compound present 
in neem has an ability to repel insects and it is used to control Barley yellow dwarf 
virus transmitted by aphids (Chandi, 2021).

The biocontrol agents like Bacillus sp. does not have direct effect on the viral 
pathogens but they have the property of enhancing the induced systemic resistance 
(ISR) in the plants. The biocontrol agent, B. subtilis subsp. subtilis when applied to 
Arabidopsis thaliana plants, induces resistance in the plants against Cucumber mosaic 
virus (Elsharkawy et al., 2022). The foliar application antagonistic B. subtilis strain 
HA1 was reported to have a positive effect on controlling Tobacco mosaic virus 
infection in tomato (El-Gendi et al., 2022).

4. Chemical methods

There is no viricide identified so far to kill the viruses. But, the vectors which 
transmit them can be controlled by chemical methods. The long lasting insecticide 
treated nets (LLITNs) were used to control the aphid (Aphis gossypii, Myzus persicae) 

36

population and it controlled Cucumber aphid-borne yellow virus (Dader et al., 2015). 
The insecticide, imidachloprid can be used to control the major hemipteran sucking 
pests like aphids, thrips, whiteflies, leafhoppers and planthoppers transmitting many 
economically important diseases like Tomato spotted wilt virus, Peanut bud necrosis 
virus, Potato leaf roll virus, Barley yellow dwarf virus etc. (Castle et al., 2009). 

5. Biotechnological approaches

The biotechnological approaches for viral disease management includes transgenic 
approaches - pathogen derived resistance like coat protein mediated resistance, 
movement protein mediated resistance, satellite mediated resistance, replicase 
mediated resistance etc., non pathogen derived resistance like resistance genes, 
ribosomal inactivating proteins, antiviral plantibodies etc. and tissue culture methods 
for virus free seedlings. The transgenic papaya varieties Sunup and Rainbow were 
developed in 1995 to be resistant against the devastating Papaya ringspot virus using 
coat protein mediated resistance and it was successfully exploited in Hawaii islands 
(Ferreira et al., 2002). The cassava mosaic virus free plantings can be obtained by 
meristem tissue culture which was effective in controlling the disease (Deepthi and 
Makeshkumar, 2016).

6. Advanced methods – Nanophytovirology

Recently nanotechnology has been playing a major role in all the branches of 
agriculture and all other research sectors. The dsRNA technology was developed 
and is an effective method for viral disease management but the problem is that 
dsRNA is unstable and it has to be coated with nanoparticles to have successful 
control. The dsRNA loaded onto hydroxide nanoparticles to form dsRNA bioclay 
and the bioclay when applied exogenously to Nicotiana benthamiana, a potential 
control against Bean common mosaic virus was achieved (Worrall et al., 2019). It 
was also reported that application of nanoparticles have controlling effects on viral 
diseases and the mechanism of action is not clearly known. The application of silver 
nanoparticles was found to control Bean yellow mosaic virus because of the ability to 
attach to the glycoprotein of the viruses (Singh et al., 2022).

Conclusion

The development of various management strategies is crucial for combating plant 
diseases brought on by plant pathogens. Agronanotechnology has taken centre 
stage since this decade, combined with the application of biological control agents. 
Integrating disease resistant measures and early diagnosis can help in minimising 
yield loss with the development of diverse scientific procedures, which on the other 
hand would open the road to feed the growing global population.

37

References

Abdelkhalek, A., Salem, M. Z., Hafez, E., Behiry, S. I., & Qari, S. H. (2020). The 
phytochemical, antifungal, and first report of the antiviral properties of Egyptian 
Haplophyllum tuberculatum extract. Biology, 9(9), 248.

Afzal, M. N., Tariq, M., Ahmed, M., Abbas, G., & Mehmood, Z. (2020). Managing 
planting time for cotton production. Cotton Production and Uses: Agronomy, 
Crop Protection, and Postharvest Technologies, 31-44.

Akanmu, A. O., Babalola, O. O., Venturi, V., Ayilara, M. S., Adeleke, B. S., Amoo, A. 
E., ... & Glick, B. R. (2021). Plant disease management: leveraging on the plant-
microbe-soil interface in the biorational use of organic amendments. Frontiers 
in Plant Science, 12, 700507.

Castle, S., Palumbo, J., & Prabhaker, N. (2009). Newer insecticides for plant virus 

disease management. Virus Research, 141(2), 131-139.

Chandi, R. S. (2021). Integrated management of insect vectors of plant pathogens. 

Agricultural Reviews, 42(1), 87-92.

Chao, Y. U., CHEN, H. M., Fang, T. I. A. N., Bi, Y. M., Steven, R. J., Jan, L. E., 
& HE, C. Y. (2015). Identification of differentially-expressed genes of rice in 
overlapping responses to bacterial infection by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae 
and nitrogen deficiency. Journal of Integrative Agriculture, 14(5), 888-899.

Chaube, H. S., & Pundhir, V. S. (2005). Crop diseases and their management. PHI 

Learning Pvt. Ltd..

Dáder, B., Legarrea, S., Moreno, A., Plaza, M., Carmo‐Sousa, M., Amor, F., ... & 
Fereres, A. (2015). Control of insect vectors and plant viruses in protected crops 
by novel pyrethroid‐treated nets. Pest Management Science, 71(10), 1397-1406.
Damayanti, T. A., & Putra, L. K. (2010). Hot water treatment of cutting-cane infected 
with Sugarcane streak mosaic virus (SCSMV). Journal of ISSAAS (International 
Society for Southeast Asian Agricultural Sciences), 16(2), 17-25.

Deepthi, D. C., & Makeshkumar, T. (2016). Elimination of cassava mosaic disease 
through meristem culture and field evaluation for yield loss assessment in 
cassava genotypes. Journal of Root Crops, 42(1), 45-52.

dos Santos, G. R., Leão, E. U., Gonçalves, C. G., & Cardon, C. H. (2013). Potassium 
fertilizer and irrigation management in the progress of fungal diseases and yield 
of watermelon. Horticultura Brasileira, 31, 36-44.

El-Baky, N. A., & Amara, A. A. A. F. (2021). Recent approaches towards control 

of fungal diseases in plants: An updated review. Journal of Fungi, 7(11), 900.

38

El-Gendi, H., Al-Askar, A. A., Király, L., Samy, M. A., Moawad, H., & Abdelkhalek, 
A. (2022). Foliar Applications of Bacillus subtilis HA1 Culture Filtrate Enhance 
Tomato Growth and Induce Systemic Resistance against Tobacco mosaic virus 
Infection. Horticulturae, 8(4), 301.

Ellur, R. K., Khanna, A., Yadav, A., Pathania, S., Rajashekara, H., Singh, V. K., ... 
& Singh, A. K. (2016). Improvement of Basmati rice varieties for resistance 
to blast and bacterial blight diseases using marker assisted backcross breeding. 
Plant Science, 242, 330-341.

Elsharkawy, M. M., Elsawy, M. M., & Ismail, I. A. (2022). Mechanism of resistance 
to Cucumber mosaic virus elicited by inoculation with Bacillus subtilis subsp. 
subtilis. Pest Management Science, 78(1), 86-94.

Ferreira, S. A., Pitz, K. Y., Manshardt, R. I. C. H. A. R. D., Zee, F., Fitch, M., & 
Gonsalves, D. E. N. N. I. S. (2002). Virus coat protein transgenic papaya provides 
practical control of papaya ringspot virus in Hawaii. Plant Disease, 86(2), 101-105.

Gharate, R. A. M. A. K. A. N. T., Singh, N. A. R. E. N. D. R. A., & Chaudhari, S. M. 
(2016). Management of common scab (Streptomyces scabies) of potato through 
eco-friendly approach. Indian Phytopathol, 69(3), 266.

Ghorbanpour, M., Omidvari, M., Abbaszadeh-Dahaji, P., Omidvar, R., & Kariman, 
K. (2018). Mechanisms underlying the protective effects of beneficial fungi 
against plant diseases. Biological Control, 117, 147-157.

Gitaitis, R., & Walcott, R. (2007). The epidemiology and management of seedborne 

bacterial diseases. The Annual Reviews of Phytopathology, 45, 371-397.

González-Fernández, R., Prats, E., & Jorrín-Novo, J. V. (2010). Proteomics of plant 

pathogenic fungi. BioMed Research International, 2010.

Goswami, S., & Mishra, S. COMMON SCAB OF POTATO (STREPTOMYCES 

SCABIES): A REVIEW. Dr. Zeenat N. Kashmiri, 105.

Gottwald, T. R. (2007). Citrus canker and citrus huanglongbing, two exotic bacterial 
diseases threatening the citrus industries of the Western Hemisphere. Outlooks 
on Pest Management, 18(6), 274.

Hamedo, H. A., & Makhlouf, A. H. (2013). Identification and characterization of 
actinomycetes for biological control of bacterial scab of Streptomyces scabies 
isolated from potato. Journal of Biology, Agriculture and Healthcare, 3(13), 142-153.

Heimpel, G. E., & Mills, N. J. (2017). Biological control. Cambridge University Press.

Hirooka, T., & Ishii, H. (2013). Chemical control of plant diseases. Journal of General 

Plant Pathology, 79, 390-401.

39

Hoffland, E., Jeger, M. J., & van Beusichem, M. L. (2000). Effect of nitrogen supply 
rate on disease resistance in tomato depends on the pathogen. Plant and Soil, 
218, 239-247.

Islam, W. (2017). Management of plant virus diseases; farmer’s knowledge and our 

suggestions. Hosts and Viruses, 4(2), 28.

Javed, M. T., Khan, M. A., Ehetisham-ul-Haq, M., & Atiq, M. (2013). Biological 
management of bacterial blight of cotton caused by Xanthomonas campestris 
pv. malvacearum through plant extracts and homeopathic products. Res J Plant 
Dis Pathol, 1, 1-10.

Jayaseelan, C., Ramkumar, R., Rahuman, A. A., & Perumal, P. (2013). Green synthesis 
of gold nanoparticles using seed aqueous extract of Abelmoschus esculentus and 
its antifungal activity. Industrial Crops and Products, 45, 423-429.

Jha, S. N., Vishwakarma, R. K., Ahmad, T., Rai, A., & Dixit, A. K. (2015). Report on 
assessment of quantitative harvest and post-harvest losses of major crops and 
commodities in India. All India Coordinated Research Project on Post-Harvest 
Technology, ICAR-CIPHET, 130.

Kamesh Krishnamoorthy, K., Malathi, V. G., Renukadevi, P., Mohan Kumar, S., 
Raveendran, M., Manivannan, N., ... & Karthikeyan, G. (2021). Population 
structure of whitefly (Bemisia tabaci) and the link between vector dynamics 
and seasonal incidence of yellow mosaic disease in blackgram (Vigna mungo). 
Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata, 169(4), 403-412.

Kiran, R., Akhtar, J., & Kumar, P. (2021). Thermotherapy: a non-chemical option 
for managing seed-borne bacterial diseases. Agri-India TODAY, 1(3), 1-5.

Krishnaraj, C., Jagan, E. G., Ramachandran, R., Abirami, S. M., Mohan, N., & 
Kalaichelvan, P. T. (2012). Effect of biologically synthesized silver nanoparticles 
on  Bacopa  monnieri  (Linn.)  Wettst.  plant  growth  metabolism.  Process 
biochemistry, 47(4), 651-658.

Kumar, S., Thakur, M., & Rani, A. (2014). Trichoderma: Mass production, formulation, 
quality control, delivery and its scope in commercialization in India for the 
management of plant diseases. African journal of agricultural research, 9(53), 
3838-3852

Lakshmeesha, T. R., Kalagatur, N. K., Mudili, V., Mohan, C. D., Rangappa, S., Prasad, 
B. D., & Niranjana, S. R. (2019). Biofabrication of zinc oxide nanoparticles 
with Syzygium aromaticum flower buds extract and finding its novel application 
in controlling the growth and mycotoxins of Fusarium graminearum. Frontiers 
in microbiology, 10, 1244.

40

Lazarovits, G., Tenuta, M., & Conn, K. L. (2001). Organic amendments as a 
disease  control  strategy  for  soilborne  diseases  of  high-value  agricultural 
crops. Australasian Plant Pathology, 30, 111-117.

Marburger, D. A., Venkateshwaran, M., Conley, S. P., Esker, P. D., Lauer, J. G., & 
Ané, J. M. (2015). Crop rotation and management effect on Fusarium spp. 
populations. Crop Science, 55(1), 365-376.

Matyjaszczyk, E. (2015). Products containing microorganisms as a tool in integrated 
pest management and the rules of their market placement in the European 
Union. Pest management science, 71(9), 1201-1206.

Mohamed, A. A., Elshafie, H. S., Sadeek, S. A., & Camele, I. (2021). Biochemical 
characterization, phytotoxic effect and antimicrobial activity against some 
phytopathogens of new Gemifloxacin schiff base metal complexes. Chemistry 
& Biodiversity, 18(9), e2100365.

Montesinos, E., & Bonaterra, A. (2017). Pesticides, microbial In Reference module 

Morton, V., & Staub, T. (2008). A short history of fungicides. APSnet Features, 308, 

in life sciences.

1-12.

Mwaniki, P. K. (2017). Impact of crop rotation sequences on potato in fields inoculated 
with bacterial wilt caused by Ralstonia solanacearum, 12(14), 1226-1235.

Navik, O. S., & Varshney, R. (2017). Field pests of wheat and their management. 

Wheat a Premier Food CroP, 322.

Pal, K. K., & Gardener, B. M. (2006). Biological control of plant pathogens.

Parameswari B, K. N., & Viswanathan, R. (2021). Sugarcane: Ratoon stunting and 
Grassy shoot. Today & Tomorrow’s Printers and Publishers, New Delhi, India.

Park, J. W., Jang, T. H., Song, S. H., Choi, H. S., & Ko, S. J. (2010). Studies on the 
soil transmission of CGMMV and its control with crop rotation. The Korean 
Journal of Pesticide Science, 14(4), 473-477.

Ristaino, J. B., Anderson, P. K., Bebber, D. P., Brauman, K. A., Cunniffe, N. J., 
Fedoroff, N. V., & Wei, Q. (2021). The persistent threat of emerging plant 
disease pandemics to global food security. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 118(23), e2022239118.

Saha, S., Garg, R., Biswas, A., & Rai, A. B. (2015). Bacterial diseases of rice: an 

overview. J Pure Appl Microbiol, 9(1), 725-736.

Sangeetha, B., Krishnamoorthy, A. S., Renukadevi, P., D Malathi, V. G., & Sharmila, 

41

A. D. J. S. (2020). Antiviral potential of Mirabilis jalapa root extracts against 
groundnut bud necrosis virus. Journal of Entomology and Zoology Studies, 8(1), 
955-961.

Saremi, H., Okhovvat, S. M., & Ashrafi, S. J. (2011). Fusarium diseases as the main 
soil borne fungal pathogen on plants and their control management with soil 
solarization in Iran. African Journal of Biotechnology, 10(80), 18391-18398.

Savary, S., Ficke, A., Aubertot, J. N., & Hollier, C. (2012). Crop losses due to diseases 
and their implications for global food production losses and food security. Food 
security, 4(4), 519-537.

Shende, S., Ingle, A. P., Gade, A., & Rai, M. (2015). Green synthesis of copper 
nanoparticles by Citrus medica Linn.(Idilimbu) juice and its antimicrobial 
activity. World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology, 31, 865-873.

Singh, R. S. (2018a). Plant diseases. Oxford and IBH Publishing.

Singh, R. S. (2018b). Introduction to principles of plant pathology. Scientific International 

(Pvt.) Ltd.

Singh, R., Kuddus, M., Singh, P. K., & Choden, D. (2022). Nanotechnology for 
Nanophytopathogens: From Detection to the Management of Plant Viruses. 
BioMed Research International, 2022.

Singh, V. K., & Pandey, P. (2012). Physical methods in management of plant diseases. 

Plant Dis, 10(1).

Sundin, G. W., Werner, N. A., Yoder, K. S., & Aldwinckle, H. S. (2009). Field 
evaluation of biological control of fire blight in the eastern United States. Plant 
Disease, 93(4), 386-394.

Swathi, P., Basu, B. J., Rao, N. S., & SaidaNaik, V. (2019). Management of yellow 
mosaic virus in blackgram through agronomic practices. Journal of Entomology 
and Zoology Studies, 7(3), 1570-1573.

Tariq, M., Khan, A., Asif, M., Khan, F., Ansari, T., Shariq, M., & Siddiqui, M. 
A. (2020). Biological control: a sustainable and practical approach for plant 
disease management. Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica, Section B—Soil & Plant 
Science, 70(6), 507-524.

Tiwari, A. K., & Rao, G. P. (2023). Production of sugarcane grassy shoot disease 
free setts by using hot water treatment. Phytopathogenic Mollicutes, 13(1), 73-74.

Vu, T. T., Kim, H., Tran, V. K., Vu, H. D., Hoang, T. X., Han, J. W., ... & Kim, J. C. 
(2017). Antibacterial activity of tannins isolated from Sapium baccatum extract 
and use for control of tomato bacterial wilt. PLoS One, 12(7), e0181499.

42

Waghmare, V. N. (2016). Cotton improvement in India. Cotton technology exchange 

program in SAARC region, 61-78.

Worrall, E. A., Bravo-Cazar, A., Nilon, A. T., Fletcher, S. J., Robinson, K. E., Carr, 
J. P., & Mitter, N. (2019). Exogenous application of RNAi-inducing double-
stranded RNA inhibits aphid-mediated transmission of a plant virus. Frontiers 
in plant science, 10, 265.

Youssef, K., de Oliveira, A. G., Tischer, C. A., Hussain, I., & Roberto, S. R. (2019). 
Synergistic effect of a novel chitosan/silica nanocomposites-based formulation 
against gray mold of table grapes and its possible mode of action. International 
Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 141, 247-258.

Zhang, J., Feng, X., Wu, Q., Yang, G., Tao, M., Yang, Y., & He, Y. (2022). Rice bacterial 
blight resistant cultivar selection based on visible/near-infrared spectrum and 
deep learning. Plant Methods, 18(1), 1-16.

Zhang, L., Lan, R., Zhang, B., Erdogdu, F., & Wang, S. (2021). A comprehensive 
review on recent developments of radio frequency treatment for pasteurizing 
agricultural products. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 61(3), 
380-394.

Zhou, H., Wei, H., Liu, X., Wang, Y., Zhang, L., & Tang, W. (2005). Improving 
biocontrol activity of Pseudomonas fluorescens through chromosomal integration 
of 2, 4-diacetylphloroglucinol biosynthesis genes. Chinese Science Bulletin, 50, 
775-781.

43

Plant Disease Epidemiology

4

Nimmala Sree Valli1  and Rajkumari  Jyotika1
1Ph.D. Scholar, Department of Plant Pathology, Agricultural College and Research 
Institute, Coimbatore, Tamilnadu Agricultural University, Tamil Nadu - 641003)

Abstract

The study of diseases in populations, especially in plant populations, is known 
as epidemiology. It is a quantitative field with solid theoretical foundations and 
real-world applications. Plant disease outbreaks have had a significant influence 
on populations of forest trees, agricultural and horticultural crops, and other plant 
species, with significant socioeconomic and political impacts. Methodologies for 
evaluating disease progression in time and space, the derivation of critical factors 
defining the rate of epidemic progress, and the degree of control required for disease 
management are all part of an epidemiologist’s toolbox. By introducing genetic 
variation in the host and pathogen, the role of disease vectors in transmission, and 
higher level interactions involved in biological regulation, the intricacy of biotic 
interactions controlling plant epidemics is demonstrated. It is determined how 
important disease is to communities of wild plant life. Some modifications to the 
epidemiological toolbox are suggested in light of the growing knowledge of the 
landscape connectivity of crop plants, natural communities, and invasive species.

Keywords: Epidemic, Epidemiology, Forecasting, Disease, Pathogen

Introduction

Epidemic is defined as the phenomenon of rapid spread of a pathogen and affects 
many individual within a population over a relatively large area within a relative 
short period of time. It is a dynamic change of plant disease in space and time. The 
study of a pathogen’s rate of multiplication, which determines its ability to transmit 

44

disease throughout a population of plants, is known as epidemiology or epiphytology. 
Epidemiology is concerned with both population genetics of the host resistance 
and the pathogen population’s capacity for evolution to develop pathogen races that 
may be more resistant to pesticides or more virulent to host types. Epidemiology, 
which has implications in human, animal, and plant diseases, is the study of how 
disease spreads among populations. Epidemiology has evolved into a quantitative 
discipline for plant diseases with the goals of characterising, defining, and predicting 
epidemics, as well as intervening to reduce the effects on plant populations. Although 
the population level is the primary focus of epidemiology, it is frequently required to 
scale up to the individual plant/cellular level and down to the community/landscape 
level in order to recognise the system hierarchies that are present.

Table 1: Some important historical epiphytotics 

Year Disease
1845 Late blight of potato

(The Irish Famine)

Causal Organisms
Phytophthora infestans

Locality
Ireland

1870 Coffee Rust
Hemileia vastatrix
1878 Downy mildew of grapevines Plasmopara viticola
1900 Lethal yellow of cocoa
1904 Chestnut blight
1916 Wheat Rust
1921 Banana bunchy top
1930 Sigatoka disease of Banana Mycosphaerella musicola
Colletotrichum falcatum
1936 Red rot of Sugarcane

MLO
Endothea parasitica
Puccinia tritici
MLO

1943 Brown spot of Rice

Drechslera oryzae

(The Great Bengal Famine)

1951 Bacterial blight of Rice

1969 Southern corn blight

1984 Apple Scab

Xanthomonas campestris 
pv. campestris
Helminthosporium  maydis 
race T
Venturia inaequalis

1999 Rice tungro disease

Rice tungro bacilliform &
Spherical virus

Sri Lanka
France
Cuba
America
USA, Canada
Australia
America
Uttar Pradesh 
(India)
West Bengal
(India)
Maharashtra 
(India)
USA

Jammu & 
Kashmir 
(India)
Punjab (India)

45

The elements of an epidemics

Plant disease epidemics develop as an outcome of interaction between susceptible 
host plant, a virulent pathogen and favourable environmental conditions. When 
favourable interaction occur between these three components, it is defined as disease 
triangle. In disease triangle, host factors includes its level of susceptibility or genetic 
resistance of host, degree of genetic uniformity of host, age of host plant and type of 
crop; pathogen factors include aggressiveness, amount of inoculum, level of virulence, 
type of reproduction and mode of spread of pathogens and environmental factors 
includes optimum moistures, temperature, soil pH, light, oxygen and carbon-dioxide 
concentration for disease development. 

The interaction of these three components in disease development is affect 
by fourth and fifth components: - time and humans. The effect of time on disease 
development include the duration and frequency of favourable rain and temperature, 
time of the year (i.e., the climatic conditions and stage of growth when host and 
pathogen may co-exist), duration of disease infection cycle and time of appearance 
of vectors. Human activities also interfere with epidemics through the kind of 
plants selected in a given area, time of planting, density of plant population and 
its management practices. Thus, the interaction of these components gives rise to 
disease tetrahedron or disease pyramid. 

46

Simple interest and Compound interest disease

In simple interest disease, the pathogen is increases as a mathematical analogue to 
simple interest in money. It is also known as monocyclic disease as the pathogen has 
only one generation during the crop season. Primary inoculum is soil and seed borne. 
Initial inoculum plays an important role in spread of disease and rarely secondary 
inoculum. The rate of spread of disease is slow and the pathogen are mostly systemic 
in nature and do not produce propagules external to host during active season. 
Monocyclic diseases as exemplified by covered smut of barley (Ustilago hordei), 
grain smut of sorghum (Sphacelotheca sorghi), loose smut of wheat (Ustilago segatum), 
vascular wilt, post-harvest diseases and disease caused by soil-borne plant pathogens.

In compound interest disease, the pathogen is increases as a mathematical 
analogue to compound interest in money. It is also known as polycyclic disease as 
the pathogen has several or many generations during the crop season. Here, the 
pathogen produces spore rapidly and disseminated by air rapidly.  The incubation 
period is short and sporulation occurs rapidly. Primary inoculum give rise to secondary 
inoculum and secondary infection play an important role in disease spread. In bimodal 
polycyclic diseases, different organs (blossoms or fruits) of the plant are attacked by 
pathogens at different time. Polycyclic diseases are exemplified by downy mildew, 
powdery mildew, rust and late blight of potato.

Slow epiphytotics and rapid epiphytotics

Slow epiphytotics occurs mostly in perennial population like trees. The pathogens 
are systemic and movement from one plant to another plant is slow. They have low 
death rate and the pathogen multiplies slowly due to lengthy incubation period 
or prolonged growth within the host tissue. Such epidemics are developed slowly 
(tardive). Environment influence is less. These type of epiphytotics is mostly resemble 

47

with simple interest disease. Crop sanitation is the best management strategy for 
slow epidemics. 

Rapid epiphytotics occurs mostly in annual crops. The pathogens are non-
systemic, high birth rate, low death rate and have many generations within a short 
time. Environment influence is more. If graphically plotted, the rate of increase and 
decline, the epidemic rate curve will be bell shape or symmetrical as in late blight 
of potato or asymmetrical with the epidemic rate greater in the early season due to 
greater susceptibility of young leaves (apple scab and downy mildew) or asymmetrical 
with epidemic rate greater in the late season. Such epidemics are developed rapidly 
(explosive). These type of epiphytotics is mostly resemble with compound interest 
disease. Chemical control is the best management strategy for rapid epidemics. 

Pattern and rate of epidemics

Patterns and rates are expressions of interactions of the structural components of 
epidemics as altered over time by environmental and human factors. Disease-progress 
curve shows the pattern of an epidemics progress over time, in terms of the amount 
of the disease tissues, numbers of lesions, or the numbers of diseased plants. The 
starting point and curve of a disease progression give information regarding the 
amount and time of appearance of the inoculum, changes in the host’s susceptibility 
during the growth period, recurring meteorological occurrences, and the efficacy of 
preventative and cultural measures. 

There are generally three types of Disease progress curve

a.  Saturation curve: For monocyclic / Simple interest disease

b.  Sigmoid curve: For polycyclic / Compound interest disease

c.  Bimodal curve: Polycyclic disease affecting different plant organs

 

Disease gradient (dispersal) curve is a curve that depict the information of the 
spread of the pathogen in and out of the host population area. The severity and the 
number of the disease plants decrease steeply near the distance of the inoculum and 
less steeply at greater distance until it reaches zero or a low background level of the 
occasional disease plants.

48

Epidemic rate curve gives the amount of increase of disease per unit of time in the 
plant population under consideration and these curve is varied for different group 
of diseases.

Types of epidemic rate curve: -

1.  Symmetrical (bell shaped): Late blight of potato

2.  Asymmetrical rate curve:
 » Epidemic rate being greater early in the season: Due to greater susceptibility 

in young leaves. 

 » Rust, Powdery mildew, Downy mildew and Apple scab.
 » Epidemic rate being greater late in the season: Due to susceptibility of 

host increases at late season. 

 » Alternaria leaf blight and Vascular wilt.

Modelling of plant disease epidemics

Plant disease modelling helps us to predict and understand the direction as well as 
severity of the disease epidemics at future point of time. The ability to predict the 
direction and severity of the diseases help us to understand when and what type of 
management strategies can be used for its effective control. The model construct is 
generally simplified but roughly analogue to real epidemics for better picture and 
understanding of real scenario. For developing a plant disease model, database is 
developed containing information on the crop, the pathogen, the disease, the location 
of the weather station, and sensor (s) relative to the crop and the crop canopy. It 
also contains information on the input variables such as measured environmental 
variables, including precipitation, relative humidity, temperature and leaf wetness; 
calculated environmental variables such as dew point or degree hours; host variables 
such as inoculum potential, spore maturity and other pathogen factors. Thus, when 
we have enough information of these sub-components of an epidemic at different 
stages and under different conditions, a mathematical model has been developed, 
depicting the relationship between host, pathogen and environment and finally 
presented as an equation, as a table, as graph or as a simple statement.

Different model used for crop-yield loss estimation

1.  Critical point model

 » Estimates the loss for any given level of disease at a given time or any given 

time when a particular amount of disease is reached.

 » Use linear regression, Y= a + b x, where disease is taken as independent variable.

49

 » Applicable in late epidemic disease, fairly stable rate of infection and dry 

matter accumulation covered for only short period of time.

 » Examples: Rice blast, Wheat stem rust (first-second leaf unfold), Potato 

late blight, Potato cyst nematode.

2.  Multiple point models

 » Estimates the disease at many points during the epidemic.
 » Use multiple regression, Y = b1 X1 + b2 X2 +…. + bn Xn, where Y is the percentage 
yield loss and a dependent variable and X1, X2….Xn are disease increment 
and independent variables.

 » Disease rating and regression coefficients is obtained as sum of the disease 
scored at different time, during disease progress and losses of crop yield. 

3.  Area under disease progress curve (AUPDC)

 » When disease severity or disease intensity is plotted against time, it gives 
disease progress curved and the area under this curved is called AUDPC.

 »

It gives quantitative measure of disease severity with time.

Where,
 »
Si  = Disease severity at end of week i
 » K = no. of successive evaluation of disease
 »
d = interval between two evaluations 

Computer simulation of epidemics

The computer is fitted with data containing various sub components of the epidemic 
and the control practices at specific points in time (such as weekly intervals). The 
computer then displays continuous information on the disease severity and spread 
of the disease over time and also the final crop and economic losses likely to 
occur during the disease epidemic. It allows to understand the importance of each 
subcomponent of an epidemic at the particular point in time, effect of each sub 
component on yield loss and help us to draw the effective management strategies 
in controlling the epidemic. The first computer simulation program, EPIDEM 
was designed against early blight of tomato and potato caused by Alternaria solani 
(1969). Some of the computer simulators are EPIMAY for Southern leaf blight 
of maize, EPICORN for Southern corn blight, CERCOS for Blight of celery, 

50

MYCOS for Blight of Chrysanthemum, EPIVEN for Apple scab, TOM-CAST 
for early blight of potato, PLASMO for Downy mildew of grapes, EPIVET for 
Viral disease of potato, EPIPIRE for Cereal rust and aphids, BLIGHT CAST, 
SIMCAST, NEGFRY for Late blight of potato. Plant disease simulator which is 
more flexible is EPIDEMIC for stripe rust of wheat because we can have modified 
easily for other host-pathogen system also.

Forecasting of plant disease epidemics

Disease forecasting is a tool to predict the disease outbreak or intensity of a particular 
area in advance so that suitable control measures can be taken up to avoid crop losses. 
Forecasting helps us to determine whether, when and where a particular management 
strategy should be applied for its effective control. To develop a successful plant 
disease forecast, one must take into account several characteristics of the particular 
host, pathogen and environment. The Key to forecast any plant epidemic disease 
includes evaluation of epidemic thresholds, evaluation of economic damage threshold, 
assessment of initial inoculum and of disease and monitoring weather that affect 
in disease development. 

Inoculum-based prediction

1.  Forecast based on amount of initial or primary inoculum: 

 »

Stewart’s wilt of corn (Erwinia stewartii), Downy mildew or blue mold of 
tobacco (Peronospora tabacina), Pea root rot (Aphanomyces euteiches), Fire 
blight of apple and pear (Erwinia amylovora) and other disease caused by 
soil-borne pathogens such as Sclerotium and cyst nematodes

2.  Forecast based on amount of secondary inoculum:

 » Late blight of potato (Phytophthora infestans), Downy mildew of grapes 
(Plasmopara viticola), Cercospora leaf spot, Early blight of tomato (Alternaria 
solani) and Septoria leaf spot.

3.  Forecast based on amount of primary and secondary inoculum:

 » Apple scab, Black rot of grapes, Botrytis leaf blight and grey mold, cereal 

rusts, sugar beet yellows

Weather-based prediction

1.  Late blight of potato

 » When constant cool temperature between 10℃ and 24℃ prevails and 
relative humidity remains over 75% for at least 48 hrs or at least 90% for 
10 hrs each day for 8 days then late blight infection will take place and 2 

51

or 3 weeks later disease outbreak is excepted.

2.  Cercospora on peanuts and celery and Exserohilum turcicum on corn

 »

It is predicted based on the temperature, the number of spores trap daily 
and the duration of the period with relative humidity near 100%. Infection 
period starts with relative humidity of 95- 100% for more than 10 hours.

3.  Bacterial blight of rice

 »

Strong wind, rainy weather with temperature of 22 -26℃.

 » Nycto- temperature of 20-24℃ with relative humidity of 90% and above 

4.  Rice blast

lasting for a week.

System approach in Epidemiology

For the majority of plant diseases, we need to come up with forecasting techniques 
that can take into account every significant factor of an epidemic, including the 
pathogen, the host, the weather, the time, and possibly the space. At the conceptual 
level, the first task of a system analyst is to identify the problem, its boundaries, and 
the objectives it seeks to achieve. Conceptual models are the first stage in model 
construction and try to logically arrange the information that is currently available 
or process thoughts for a critical analysis. The conceptual models display the order of 
processes and the level of decision-making. Additionally, it provides a comprehensive 
understanding of the system and the interrelated variables that affect the system’s 
behaviour. The relationship between illness, weather, time, and space for wheat rusts 
was attempted to be correlated by Joshi et al. in 1974.

Joshi and Palmer (1973) used geophytopathology in field experiments to 
determine the causes of the non-functional nature of wheat stem rust over North-
West India. At Karnal, Haryana, the spread of black, brown, and yellow rusts on 
wheat across time was monitored from a single point source. Their main goal was to 
show that the disease cannot spread, even in the unlikely event that stray stem rust 
urediniospores survive in the Himalayas. Meanwhile, North India’s ongoing cold 
temperatures is helping to promote brown and yellow rusts on wheat. Stem rust 
spread is at its greatest between January and March, according to a disease gradient 
from a single point source. Therefore, a carefully thought out geophytopathological 
investigation can shed light on a lot of aspects that are now unclear.

Epidemiology of plant viruses

Over the past ten years, significant advancements have been made in our understanding 

52

of plant virus infections, how they affect agriculture and wild plant ecosystems, and 
how ecological and evolutionary knowledge might be combined. More understanding 
has been given to the role and purpose of plant viruses in nature, for instance, the 
evolutionary paths that might lead from pathogenicity to mutualism and back again. 
However, more proof is needed before quantitative epidemiological research may 
be utilised to control diseases, describe, and explain short-term changes. Equally 
important is paying as much attention to the ecology of domesticated crops, farming 
practises, and their overall effects on plant viruses and pathogens as has been carried 
out for wild plant communities. Over the past few decades, epidemiological analysis 
techniques have also advanced. The effortless description of progression of diseases 
curves and disease gradients has been replaced by more sophisticated methods of 
epidemiological analysis over the past decade or so. When extensive empirical data 
on disease progression and related biotic and abiotic factors are available, modern 
computational and data mining techniques have transformed the ways in which 
theoretical epidemiological models can be evaluated and parameters estimated, for 
example, by linking Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to estimate 
the parameters of compartmental models of disease progress.

 Instead than obtaining an adequate expression from theoretical models, there 
should be a larger effort made to compute the fundamental reproduction number 
from field data. A great deal of research has been done on characterising and, in some 
circumstances, forecasting the effects of a plant virus epidemic by characterising the 
spatial aggregation/structure in landscapes. In contrast to fungal plant diseases, more 
research is required to understand how climate change is affecting agricultural and 
wild populations of plant viruses, particularly where the impacts of virus infection vary 
in terms of host growth and aphid performance. There is a growing understanding 
that suitable spatial and temporal scales are necessary for forecasting when relating 
epidemiological research and analysis to disease management.

 Crop variability is known to reduce the growth of arthropod pest populations 
and the harm they inflict; hence, effects on epidemics of plant virus vectors should 
also be considered. Despite being widely acknowledged to be effective in controlling 
arthropod pests, integrated pest management has not yet been properly applied to 
developing and putting into place integrated disease control strategies for plant 
viruses. Building on past empirical studies for process-driven model predictions 
of vector-related elements of virus epidemics, such as Plumb’s infectivity index 
for BYDV, is a viable strategy. The increased importance and acknowledgement of 
the vector in all areas of virus epidemiology during the past ten years may be the 
most encouraging development. This is also a prevalent theme from the ecological 
and evolutionary viewpoints. Only after characterising the dynamic interaction 

53

between the virus, vector, and host can it be decided how to best implement host 
resistance and tolerance in the field. The effects of releasing varieties with various 
resistance mechanisms can vary and have an impact on how well a variety is used. 
Deeper findings that such as how the interactions between horizontal and vertical 
transmission can have substantial epidemiological and evolutionary effects, have 
replaced the first basic categorization of the primary function of vector transmission 
in virus epidemiology. Expanding it to the field will be a difficulty because most of 
this understanding has been obtained from theoretical models and small laboratory/
microcosm trials. 

The research on vector preference and the degree to which the virus is influencing 
the vector and host for its own purposes is a noteworthy aspect that highlights this 
necessity. Although much progress has been made in understanding the molecular 
underpinnings of vector preference, translating this knowledge into epidemiological 
and evolutionary implications remains a difficult task. It is now understood that 
co-infection with plant viruses is typical for many crops. How substantial is this 
co-infection, though, and how much of it is really the result of recent advancements 
in high throughput sequencing?

However, there needs to be more focus on how two or more viruses are 
interacting within the plant and much greater rigour in defining the outcomes 
of such interactions, whether antagonistic, neutral, or facilitative (use of the term 
synergistic requires considerable caution). There are instances where co-infection 
can cause more damage to a crop than do single viruses. Even if these interactions 
are defined, further research is still required to understand how they manifest in 
epidemics. In general, the role of the vector in sustaining coinfection in a plant 
population has not received enough attention in studies on how coinfection may or 
may not alter vector preference. Finally, even though multipartite viruses are rarely 
thought of as coinfections, the question of how multipartite viruses even survive 
in a plant population still remains for those that have genomic segments that are 
encapsidated separately and may require separate inoculations by a vector for a fully 
functional virus to be present in a plant cell.

Conclusion

Plant disease epidemics develop as a result of the timely combination of the same 
elements that result in plant disease: susceptible host plants, a virulent pathogen, 
and favorable environmental conditions over a relatively long period of time.  To 
describe the interaction of the components of plant disease epidemics, the disease 
triangle, and describes the interaction of the components of plant disease, can be 
expanded to include time and humans. The effect of time on disease development 

54

becomes apparent when one considers the importance of the time of year (i.e., the 
climatic conditions and stage of growth when host and pathogen may coexist), the 
duration and frequency of favorable temperature and rains, the time of appearance 
of the vector, the duration of the infection cycle of a particular disease, and so on. 
Humans affect the kind of plants grown in a given area, the degree of plant resistance, 
the numbers planted, time of planting, and density of the plants.The increase in the 
amount of disease at any one time is dependent of the initial amount of disease or 
initial inoculum, the rate of disease increase, and the duration of disease increase 
on the period of time involved.Control practices that reduce the amount of initial 
inoculum or initial plant disease cause delay of the specific point of the time at which 
a given disease level is reached but they do not change the rate of disease increase.

References
Agrios, G. N. (2005). Plant Disease Epidemiology. Plant Pathology, 5th Edition. 

Elsevier Academic Press, London, UK, 266 - 289.

Alcalá-Briseño, R.I.; Casarrubias-Castillo, K.; López-Ley, D.; Garrett, K.A.; 
Silva-Rosales, L. Network analysis of the papaya orchard virome from two 
agroecological regions of Chiapas, Mexico. mSystems 2020,5, e00423-19

Alexander, H.M.; Mauck, K.E.; Whitfield, A.E.; Garrett, K.A.; Malmstrom, C.M. 
Plant-virus interactions and the agro-ecological interface. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 
2014, 138, 529–547. [CrossRef ]

Allen-Perkins, A.; Estrada, E. Mathematical modeling for sustainable aphid control in 
agriculture via intercropping. Proc. R. Soc. A 2019, 475, a20190136. [CrossRef ] 
[PubMed]

Batuman, O.; Turini, T.A.; LeStrange, M.; Stoddard, S.; Miyao, G.; Aegerter, B.J.; 
Chen, L.-F.; McRoberts, N.; Ullman, D.E.; Gilbertson, R.L. Development of 
an IPM strategy for thrips and Tomato spotted wilt virus in processing tomatoes 
in the Central Valley of California. Pathogens 2020, 9, 636. [CrossRef ]

Beltran-Beltran, A.K.; Santillán-Galicia, M.T.; Guzmán-Franco, A.W.; Teliz-
Ortiz, D.; Gutiérrez-Espinoza, M.A.; Romero-Rosales, F.; Robles-García, 
P.L. Incidence of Citrus leprosis virus C and Orchid fleck dichorhavirus citrus 
strain in mites of the genus Brevipalpus in Mexico. J. Econ. Entomol. 2020, 
113, 1576–1581. [CrossRef ]

Burdon, J.J.; Thrall, P.H. What have we learned from studies of wild plant-pathogen 
associations?—The dynamic interplay of time, space and life-history. Eur. J. 
Plant Pathol. 2014, 138, 417–429. [CrossRef ]

55

Chen, Y.H.; Gols, R.; Benrey, B. Crop domestication and its impact on naturally 
selected trophic interactions. Annu. Rev. Entomol. 2015, 60, 35–58. [CrossRef ] 
[PubMed]

Fargette, D.; Vié, K. Simulation of the effects of host resistance, reversion, and 
cutting selection on incidence of African cassava mosaic virus and yield losses 
in cassava. Phytopathology 1995, 85, 370–375. [CrossRef ] 

Hamelin, F.M.; Allen, L.J.S.; Bokil, V.A.; Gross, L.J.; Hilker, F.M.; Jeger, M.J.; 
Manore, C.A.; Power, A.G.; Rúa, M.A.; Cunniffe, N.J. Co-infections by non-
interacting pathogens are not independent: Deriving new tests of interaction. 
PLoS Biol. 2019, 17, e3000551. [CrossRef ] [PubMed]

Holt, J.; Chancellor, T.C.B. Modelling the spatio-temporal deployment of resistant 
varieties to reduce the incidence of rice tungro disease in a dynamic cropping 
system. Plant Pathol. 1999, 48, 453–461. [CrossRef ]

Jeger, M.J. Bottlenecks in IPM. Crop Prot. 2000, 19, 787–792. [CrossRef ]

Kendig, A.E.; Borer, E.T.; Mitchell, C.E.; Power, A.G.; Seabloom, E.W. Characteristics 
and drivers of plant virus community spatial patterns in US west coast grasslands. 
Oikos 2017, 126, 1281–1290. [CrossRef ]

MacDiarmid, R.; Rodoni, B.; Melcher, U.; Ochoa-Corona, F.; Roossinck, M. 
Biosecurity implications of new technology and discovery in plant virus research. 
PLoS Pathog. 2013, 9, e1003337. [CrossRef ] [PubMed]

McLeish, M.J.; Sacristán, S.; Fraile, A.; García-Arenal, F. Co-infection organises 
epidemiological networks of viruses and hosts and reveals hubs of transmission. 
Phytopathology 2019, 109, 1003–1010. [CrossRef ] [PubMed]

Mehrotra, R. S. & Aggarwal, A. Plant Disease Epidemiology and Plant Disease 
Forecasting. Plant Pathology. 3rd Edition. McGraw Hill Education (India) Pvt. 
Ltd, New Delhi, 247- 265.

Naidu, R.A.; Maree, H.J.; Burger, J.T. Grapevine leafroll disease and associated 
viruses: A unique pathosystem. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 2015, 53, 613–634. 
[CrossRef ] [PubMed]

Osada,  Y.;  Yamakita,  T.;  Shoda-Kagaya,  E.;  Liebhold,  A.M.;  Yamanaka,  T. 
Disentangling the drivers of invasion spread in a vector-borne tree disease. J. 
Anim. Ecol. 2018, 8, 1512–1524. [CrossRef ] [PubMed]

Reitz, S.R.; Gao, Y.; Kirk, W.D.J.; Hoddle, M.S.; Leiss, K.A.; Funderburk, J.E. 
Invasion biology, ecology, and management of Western Flower Thrips. Annu. 
Rev. Entomol. 2020, 65, 17–37. [CrossRef ] [PubMed]

56

Roberts, M.G.; Heesterbeek, J.A.P. Model-consistent estimation of the basic 
reproduction number from the incidence of an emerging infection. J. Math. 
Biol. 2007, 55, 803–816. [CrossRef ]

Singh, R. S. (2018). Epidemiology. Introduction to Principles of Plant Pathology, 5th 

Edition. Scientific International (Pvt.) Ltd, New Delhi, 117- 132.

Untiveros, M.; Fuentes, S.; Salazar, L.F. Synergistic interaction of Sweet potato 
chlorotic stunt virus (Crinivirus) with carla-, cucumo-, ipomo-, and potyviruses 
infecting sweet potato. Plant Dis. 2007, 91, 669–676. [CrossRef ] [PubMed]

Van den Driessche, P. Reproduction numbers of infectious disease models. Inf. Dis. 

Model. 2017, 2, 288–303.[CrossRef ]

Varghese, A.; Drovandi, C.; Mira, A.; Mengersen, K. Estimating a novel stochastic 
model for within-field disease dynamics of banana bunchy top virus via 
approximate Bayesian computation. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2020, 16, e1007878. 
[CrossRef ]

Wilhoit, L.R. Modelling the population dynamics of different aphid genotypes in 

plant variety mixtures. Ecol. Model. 1991, 55, 257–283. [CrossRef ]

57

5

Enzymes and Toxins

in Pathogenesis

Saru Sara Sam1, Alby John2 and Deepa R. Chandran3
1,2,3Department of Plant Pathology, College of Agriculture, Vellayani, 
Kerala Agricultural University, Thiruvananthapuram- 695522, Kerala

Abstract

Pathogenesis implies the series of development of an infection and the continuous 
events which leads to the development of a disease because of a chain of events 
occurring at the morphology and metabolism of a plant tissue which is been attacked 
by a pathogen, chemical or physical agent. The events in disease cycle includes 
host recognition, infection, invasion, colonization, growth and reproduction of 
pathogen, symptom development, dissemination of pathogen, incubation, attachment, 
penetration and finally the disease development. The important determinants for the 
initiation of disease and its severity depends on the amount of toxin and enzymes 
produced. Moreover, the plant produces various components as a defense mechanism 
against the invading pathogens. The toxins and enzymes produced by the pathogens 
can counteract the defense produced and leads to the plant-pathogen interactions. 
Numerous plant diseases release enzymes such cellulases, pectinases, and ligninases 
to break down parts of the plant cell wall such that the pathogens can utilize the 
photosynthates for growth and development. The toxins produced by the pathogens 
can interfere in plants metabolism and produces various symptoms specific to the 
pathogen. Thus, the combinations of toxin and enzymes are the major determinants 
for disease initiation and spread in plant hosts.

Keywords : Pathogenesis, Toxin, Enzymes, plant-pathogen interactions

58

Introduction

Pathogenesis implies the series of development of an infection and the continuous 
events which leads to the development of a disease because of a chain of events 
occurring at the morphology and metabolism of a plant tissue which is been attacked 
by a pathogen, chemical or physical agent. The pathogenesis in an infection cycle 
implies the various mechanism through which the etiological factors stimulate 
the disease development. Pathogenesis can be synonymously used for describing 
the development changes of a disease, which can be acute, chronic or recurrent. 
Pathogenesis originates from a Greek word pathos which means “disease” and the 
word genesis which means “creation”. There are different chemical components secreted 
by the pathogens which are essential as they bring out the disease developmental 
activities (Vidhyasekaran, 2007). The above mentioned components include enzymes, 
toxins, plant growth regulators and infectious polysaccharides.

Enzymes and toxins impart the most determinants in plant the events of 
pathogenesis, through the process by which infectious plant pathogens, which 
includes fungi, bacteria, viruses, and nematodes can cause diseases developments in 
plants. Pathogens such as fungi, nematodes and bacteria are capable to produce more 
than one of the toxins and enzymes in the interactions imparted in pathogen-host. 
Viruses and viroids hardly secrete enzymes but a few of them could encapsidate 
the enzymes in a particle which they produce. Plant pathogenic organisms are 
able to continually secrete enzymes in a constitutive manner or at least when the  
organism comes in contact with the plant. The upcoming pathogens are developing 
and developed numerous strategies in invading and colonizing the plant parts where 
toxins and enzymes are being used as the important determinants to overcome the 
defense imparted by plants thus ultimately helps in the establishment of infections 
(Pfeilmeier et al., 2016). The major roles of enzymes and toxins in plant pathogenesis 
are utilization of enzymes in cell wall degradation, toxins imparting damage to host 
tissues, toxins required in the interference of host defense mechanisms, and various 
enzymes for photosynthates acquisition and the detoxification of plant defense.

Numerous plant diseases release enzymes such cellulases, pectinases, and 
ligninases to break down parts of the plant cell wall, which is what is meant by the 
term “enzymes for plant cell wall degradation.” Invading cells and gaining access to 
nutrients is made possible by these enzymes’ breakdown of structural polysaccharides 
like cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin. The pathogens create toxins that can directly 
harm plant tissues, whereas the toxins produced by bacteria can start host tissue 
damage (Sexton et al., 2006). These toxins break cell membranes, cause programmed 
cell death (apoptosis), impair protein synthesis, and interfere with a variety of cellular 
functions. Toxins provide an environment that is conducive to pathogen colonization 

59

and nutrient uptake by producing tissue necrosis or wilting. The chemicals created 
for controlling host defense mechanisms by secreting compounds that control plant 
defense mechanisms. These poisons can undermine or circumvent plant defenses, 
which enables the pathogen to spread infection (Brader et al., 2017). By targeting 
and suppressing plant defense signaling pathways, for instance, pathogen effector 
proteins can help the pathogen evade detection and colonization. 

For the purpose of improving nutrient uptake, microorganisms develop enzymes 
that break down plant tissues and macromolecules like proteins, carbohydrates, and 
lipids into smaller molecules that are simple for them to absorb and use as nutrients 
(Khan et al., 2011). These enzymes hydrolyze proteins, lipids, and starch, respectively, 
and comprise proteases, lipases, and amylases. The substances that plants produce 
as a defense can be detoxified by pathogens. As a result, bacteria create detoxifying 
enzymes such detoxifying oxidases or hydrolases that neutralize or modify the harmful 
substances, enabling the pathogen to survive and spread disease (Kimura, 2001).

In general, the pathogenic factors that allow plant pathogens get past plant 
defenses mechanisms, infiltrate plant tissues, gain nutrition, and trick the host 
immune system are the enzymes and poisons they create. For the purpose of creating 
ways to prevent plant diseases and safeguard crop plants, it is critical to comprehend 
these mechanisms.

Enzymes in Pathogenesis

Plant pathogens mostly engage in chemical-based activities. Numerous enzymes 
secreted by phytopathogens weaken the host’s defensive coats. Thus, phytopathogens 
use enzymes as chemical weapons. Through stomata or other naturally occurring 
holes, pathogens can enter the host and initiate pathogenesis. The mode of entry 
includes lenticels, hydathodes, and nectarthodes, wounds, or physically breaking 
through the host’s defensive layers by means of various strategies.

 Fungal pathogens can enter through one or more of the methods mentioned 
above. Due to the fact that the majority of bacteria do not secrete enzymes that 
degrade cell walls, they can enter the host tissues through any gap in the host surface. 
Large protein molecules typically make up enzymes, which catalyze biological 
reactions. Some enzymes are created only when they are needed, while others are 
constitutive, active all the time, and catalyze all the vital reactions needed by the 
organism (Doehlemann et al., 2017).

Pathogens typically make their first communication with their host near the 
surface of plants, such as leaves for pathogens that fly. To enter the host, they must first 
compromise the host’s defenses. Multiple layers of protection are applied to plants to 

60

prevent easy invasion by any creature. Cuticle, which is made up of cutin and waxes 
combined together, is the outermost and most protective covering of leaves. Pectin 
and hemicelluloses are located close together. These make up the middle lamella. 
The most prevalent polymer in plants, cellulose, makes up the cell wall. 

The internal cell walls, which are made of cellulose, pectins, hemicelluloses, and 
structural proteins, as well as the middle lamella, which is formed of hemicelluloses, 
are broken down, allowing pathogens to enter parenchymatous tissues more easily. 
The pathogenic organism frequently secretes ligases, cellulases, cutinases, and 
cellulolytic enzymes. By allowing viruses to infect and colonize host plants, enzymes 
play a crucial part in the development of plant diseases. Different enzymes produced 
by plant pathogens help with nutrition acquisition, host defense suppression, and 
penetration of plant tissues. 

The cuticle and plant cell wall are the first surfaces an organism comes into 
contact with for pathogenesis. The complex wax called cutin, which makes up 
the cuticle, impregnates the cellulose wall. The structural component of the cell 
wall is cellulose, which is also made up of the matrix components hemicellulose, 
glycoproteins, pectin, and lignin. 

Therefore, one or more enzymes that break down these chemical compounds 
are responsible for their entry into live parenchymatous tissues and the breakdown 
of the middle lamella. 

The cuticle layer’s cutin is broken down by cutinases, which presoftens the 
tissue for mechanical penetration or as the initial stage of tissue breakdown. The 
major cell wall’s middle lamella is made up of pectic materials, which also create an 
amorphous gel between the cellulose microfibrils. Pectin methyl esterases (PME), 
polygalacturonases (PG), and pectin lyases or transeliminases are pectin-degrading 
compounds that are frequently referred to as pectinases or pectolytic enzymes. 

Small groups like methyl groups (CH3) are frequently removed by pectin methyl 
esterases, which alters solubility and slows down the pace at which polygalacturonase 
and pectin lyase break chains. While pectin lyases cleave chains by removing a water 
molecule from the bond, polygalacturonases do the opposite. Many different plant 
diseases, especially the soft rot diseases, are caused by pectin-degrading enzymes 
(Tucker et al., 2001).

Cellulase 

Cellulose is converted to glucose by cellulase enzymes. Three enzymes are included in 
cellulase, including 1,4-endoglucanase, cellobiohydrolase, and glucosidase. Bacteria 
and fungi create cellulases. Endoglucanases randomly hydrolyze internal glycosidic 

61

links, which causes the length of the polymer to rapidly decrease and the concentration 
of reducing sugar to gradually rise. 

By removing cellobiose from either the reducing or nonreducing ends of cellulose 
chains, exoglucanases hydrolyze the chains, causing a rapid release of reducing sugars 
but little change in polymer length. Cellobiose is created when endoglucanases and 
exoglucanases work in concert to break down cellulose into glucose. 

While Claviceps purpurea early infection phase on Secale cereale expresses 
cellobiohydrolase, which increases the pathogen’s virulence, Macrophomina phaseolina 
uses an endocellulase for pathogenicity. One endocellulase is produced by the 
phytopathogenic Alternaria alternata, which plays a significant role in the progression 
of disease in persimmon fruit. The development of symptoms was inhibited by 
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae mutant strains lacking cellulase, which cause bacterial 
leaf blight in rice (Annis et al., 1997).  

During the pathogenesis process, Erwinia carotovora subsp. carotovora can 
generate a significant amount of cellulase, which weakens the host cell wall and 
promotes faster infection rates and longer disease duration. This weakening of the cell 
wall was greatly diminished in potato tissues of Erwinia carotovora subsp. carotovora 
cellulase-inhibited mutants. The hydrolysis of lignocellulosic polymer materials 
occurs naturally as a result of synergistic interactions among cellulolytic microbes. 

Hemicellulases 

Complex polysaccharide polymers called hemicelluloses connect the terminals of pectic 
compounds to cellulose microfibrils. Numerous hemicellulases have been discovered 
in numerous plant pathogenic fungi due to the wide variety of hemicelluloses, which 
include xyloglucans, glucomannans, glactomannans, arabinoglucans, etc. The middle 
lamella, which is rich in pectin, and the chemically intricate cell wall, which secretes 
a wide range of enzymes that break down the middle lamella and cell wall, are the 
physical barriers that Fusarium encounters at this stage.  

When Fusaria sp. and other fungal plant diseases attack cereals, pectin-degrading 
enzymes are typically the first middle lamella- and cell wall-degrading enzymes 
released. Their activity then exposes other cell wall polysaccharides for degradation 
by hemicellulases and cellulases. Plant defense proteins called polygalacturonase-
inhibiting proteins (PGIPs) decrease the hydrolytic activity of endoPGs and encourage 
the buildup of long-chain oligogalacturonides (OGs), which trigger a range of 
defensive reactions. The leucine reach repeat (LRR) protein superfamily, which 
also includes the byproducts of various plant resistance genes, includes PGIPs as a 
member (Ma et al., 2015). 

62

Ligninases

The most common type of white-rot fungi mineralize the components of cell walls 
(cellulose, hemicelluloses, and lignins) and extensively breakdown lignins, giving 
rotting wood a bleached appearance. Heme-peroxidases and laccases released by 
fungi that utilise the oxidants H2O2 and O2 as electron acceptors participate in 
the breakdown of lignin. Lignin peroxidases, manganese peroxidases, and versatile 
peroxidases are the three primary heme-peroxidases. Lignin is able to oxidize non-
phenolic lignin units, as can numerous peroxidases.

In the middle lamella and secondary cell wall of plants, lignin, a phenylpropanoid, 
can be detected. The stiff, woody character of woody tissues is mostly conferred by 
lignin. Wood rotting fungus are a rare breed, with about 500 species. Basidiomycetes, 
or “white-rot” fungus, are responsible for the majority of lignin breakdown. The 
ligninases that these fungus create allow them to use lignin (Asemoloye et al., 2021).

Numerous fungi species have been found to have laccase activity, and the enzyme 
has already been isolated from dozens of different species. This could suggest that 
laccases are extracellular enzymes that are typically found in the majority of fungal 
species. Environmentally speaking, the wood-rotting basidiomycetes that produce laccase 
are closely connected to the wood-degrading ascomycetes that include the soft rotter 
Trichoderma and the ligninolytic Bothryosphaeria. A variety of phenolic compounds 
are used as hydrogen donors by laccase as it catalyzes the conversion of O2 to H2O.

Toxins in Pathogenesis

The pathogenesis of plant infections is greatly impacted by toxins. Pathogens generate 
these poisons to aid in the spread of colonisation and disease. Plant toxins are the 
compounds needed for virulence and aggressivity, respectively. Pathogenicity, which 
is a qualitative term, refers to a pathogen’s capacity to cause disease (Logrieco et 
al., 2011). Virulence is a quantitative term that refers to the quantity or extent of 
the disease caused. Interest in the toxin theory of plant disease was rekindled by 
the identification of the host-specific toxin victorin. Toxins can harm or even kill 
the host when they interact with living host cells. Depending on the concentration, 
toxins can produce either conventional or unusual symptoms (Yamane et al., 2010). 

Toxins are frequently categorized as generic, host-specific, or selective. Nonspecific 
toxins can affect both animals and plants in general, while host-specific toxins are 
highly active exclusively against the host of the disease that produces them. Because 
of their great potency, host-specific toxins are active against even disease-resistant 
plants at low doses and have an extremely narrow target range for susceptible plants. 
Toxins decrease host defense mechanisms, aid in the colonization and establishment 

63

of pathogens within plant tissues, and hasten the spread of illness. For the purpose 
of managing and controlling plant diseases, it is essential to comprehend how toxins 
are produced and how they affect plant hosts (Durbin, 2012).

Moreover, if the toxin is host-specific and targets a certain species or cultivar of 
plant. These toxins aid in the pathogen’s host specificity, enabling it to infect and spread 
illness only to particular plant hosts while sparing others. For instance, Cochliobolus 
victoriae host-specific toxin causes Victoria blight in oats but has no effect on other 
plant species. While pathogens that draw their nutrition from dead or dying host 
cells create necrotrophic toxins, which cause necrosis or cell death in plant tissues. 
These toxins degrade host cells, liberate nutrients, and foster an environment that 
is conducive to the pathogen’s expansion and colonization (Daub, 2005). 

For instance, the Fusicoccum amygdali produced toxin fusicoccin results in necrosis 
in stone fruit trees. Some microorganisms create toxins that prevent the synthesis of 
chlorophyll or photosynthesis in plant cells, which ultimately leads to chlorosis or the 
yellowing of plant tissues, which weakens the plant’s overall health and diminishes 
its capacity to perform photosynthesis (Upadhyay et al., 2015). Coronatine, a toxin 
produced by Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria, causes chlorosis in tomato and 
pepper plants. A few diseases create toxins that imitate or interfere with plant hormones, 
preventing normal plant development and growth (Scheffer, 1991). 

The toxins affect plant physiology in favor of the pathogen by manipulating 
plant hormone signaling pathways. A toxin termed gibberellin, which is produced 
by Gibberella fujikuroi and mimics the plant hormone gibberellic acid, promotes 
aberrant growth in rice plants. Pathogens that directly harm plant tissues and cells 
produce phytotoxins. These toxins cause cell death and tissue damage by rupturing 
cellular membranes, impeding protein synthesis, interfering with DNA replication, 
or inducing oxidative stress. For instance, the phytotoxin syringomycin, which is 
made by the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae, disrupts plant cell membranes and 
results in leaf spot symptoms (Walton, 1996).

Non-Specific Toxins 

Regardless of whether they are a host or non-host of the pathogen causing the 
toxin, many plants can be harmed by it. Nonspecific toxins have a broad spectrum of 
effects on plants regardless of whether they are a host or non-host of the pathogen 
producing them, in contrast to host-specific toxins, which target a specific species 
or cultivar of plant. The infections that create these poisons often affect a variety 
of plant species and have a wide host range (Horbach et al., 2011). Non-specific 
toxins frequently function as generic virulence factors that increase the generating 
pathogen’s overall pathogenicity. 

64

Tab toxin

Non-specific toxins can operate in a number of ways, such as by rupturing cell 
membranes, impairing cellular functions, reducing host defenses, or even causing 
cell death. These poisons allow the virus to travel both inside and between various 
plant species, establish infections, and take advantage of host resources. As they aid 
in the onset and progression of certain pathogen-caused diseases, nonspecific toxins 
play a crucial role in plant pathology (Sharma et al., 2019).

The “wildfire disease of tobacco” is a result of tab toxin. Leaves with this condition 
have necrotic patches with a yellow halo around them. Culture filtrates of pathogen or 
its  pure toxins that produce symptoms that are equivalent to those of a tobacco 
wildfire may cause the sickness. Necrotic patches with a yellow halo are produced on 
leaves by strains that produce toxins. The toxin is not host-specific because similar 
effects can be seen on a variety of hosts. Chemically, tabtoxin is a dipeptide made 
up of the amino acids tabtoxinine and threonine. The active toxin, tabtoxinine, is 
released when tabtoxin is broken inside the cell.

The common amino acid threonine with the hitherto unidentified amino acid 
tabtoxinine make up the dipeptide known as tabtoxin. Although tabtoxin itself is 
not poisonous, in the cell it undergoes hydrolysis and releases tabtoxinine, the poison 
that actually causes harm. Because tabtoxin, through tabtoxinine, deactivates the 
enzyme glutamine synthetase, glutamine levels are lowered, hazardous ammonia 
concentrations build up, and tabtoxin is poisonous to cells as a result. The latter 
separates photosynthesis and photorespiration and breaks down the chloroplast’s 
thylakoid membrane, leading to chlorosis and ultimately necrosis. The toxin’s effects 
diminish the plant’s capacity to actively react to the bacterium (Does et al., 2007).

Phaseolotoxin

P. syringae pv. phaseolicola and actinidiae, which cause bacterial canker on kiwifruit 
and halo blight on legumes, both produce phaseolotoxin. toxin connected to the 
“halo blight” bacterial bean blight. The toxin itself has the ability to cause symptoms 
of the sickness that the bacterium causes. The toxin is an ornithine-alanine-arginine 
tripeptide with a phosphosulfinyl group. Phaseolotoxin is a tripeptide made of 
ornithine, alanine, and homoarginine that is connected to a sulfodiaminophosphinyl 
moiety. The poisonous constituent of the toxin, phosphosulfinylornithine, is released 
by enzymatic cleavage within the cells. The inactivation of the enzyme ornithine 
carbamoyltransferase has cellular effects (Bronson, 1991). 

P. syringae pv. phaseolicola and actinidiae produce phaseolotoxin, which causes 
bacterial canker on kiwifruit and halo blight on legumes. toxin responsible for 

65

the “halo blight”—one of the bacterial bean blights. The toxin itself is capable of 
causing the disease that the bacterium causes to manifest. The toxin is a tripeptide 
made up of ornithine, alanine, and arginine that has a phosphosulfinyl group. A 
sulfodiaminophosphinyl moiety connected to a tripeptide made of ornithine, alanine, 
and homoarginine makes up the structure of phaseolotoxin (Annis et al, 1997). The 
poisonous moiety, phosphosulfinylornithine, is released by enzymatic cleavage of the 
toxin inside of cells. The inhibition of the enzyme ornithine carbamoyltransferase 
has an impact on the cellular structure. 

Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes depend on the urea cycle, and P. syringae pv. 
phaseolicola produces two isozymes of OCTase to counteract phaseolotoxin’s harmful 
effects. One isozyme is susceptible (SOCTase) and the other is resistant to the toxin 
(ROCTase). P. syringae pv. phaseolicola produces the ROCTase isoform when the 
conditions are favorable for the formation of phaseolotoxin. 

Tentoxin

A naturally occurring cyclic tetrapeptide called tentoxin is made by the phytopathogenic 
fungus Alternaria alternata. Chlorosis is selectively induced in a number of germination 
seedling plants. As a result, tentoxin has the potential to be employed as a natural 
herbicide. Alternaria alternata became the first source of tentoxin. This organism 
primarily causes seedling diseases in a wide variety of plant types. When more 
than one-third of the leaf surface is chlorotic, a seedling will die, and vigor will be 
reduced with less chlorosis. 

Recent studies have also employed tentoxin to stop the polyphenol oxidase 
(PPO) activity in seedlings of higher plants. A chloroplast-coupling factor protein 
that is involved in energy transfer as well as the suppression of light-dependent 
phosphorylation of ADP to produce ATP is targeted by the toxin, which is a 
cyclic tripeptide (King et al., 2011). Tentoxin has a reversible chlorotic effect, and 
it prevents decotyledonized embryos from utilizing the nutrients in the growth 
medium and making up for the absence of cotyledons. The citrus system provides 
a special opportunity to investigate the connection between tentoxin’s impact on 
chloroplast ATPase activity and the production of chlorosis.

Host Specific Toxins

Host-specific toxins (HSTs) are pathogen effectors that only affect the host species 
and only in genotypes of that host that express a particular, frequently dominant 
susceptibility gene. They cause toxicity and promote disease in the host species. These 
are metabolic byproducts from pathogenic microorganisms that are only hazardous to 
their hosts. Helminthosporium victoriae, Periconia circinata, and Alternaria kikuchiana 

66

all have significant host-specific toxins. These compounds are very poisonous to 
susceptible organisms yet almost non-hazardous to other living creatures. 

All of the symptoms of the diseases brought on by the corresponding infections 
are produced by the recognized host-specific toxins. The appealing theory that poisons 
contribute to plant illnesses has been around since deBary’s time. When the toxin 
theory is reduced to its simplest form, it may be said that all of the symptoms of 
a certain disease are caused by a toxic byproduct of the bacterium that causes that 
disease. When the toxin is artificially delivered at amounts that could be reasonably 
anticipated in or around the diseased plant, it causes all of the disease’s symptoms in 
a susceptible host. The ability of the pathogen to create the toxin directly correlates 
with its capacity to cause disease, and both the pathogen and the toxin demonstrate 
similar host specificity. Additionally, just one toxin is implicated. 

The first toxin to be discovered that met the aforementioned requirements 
was made by Cochliobolus (Helminthosporium) victoriae. With the development and 
widespread use of the oat variety Victoria’ and its derivatives, which had the Vb gene 
for resistance to the crown rust disease, Helminthosporium leaf blight of oats first 
occurred in 1945. The fungus that causes the victoria lines enters plant roots and, 
while it does so, produces a poison that spreads to the leaves, where it kills the plant 
and causes severe leaf blight. All other oat kinds and plant species are either resistant 
to the poison or their sensitivity to it is inversely correlated with how susceptible 
they are to the fungus (Trail et al., 1990). 

In addition to creating internal biochemical and histochemical changes that are 
comparable to those caused by the disease, the toxin also causes outward symptoms that 
are similar to those caused by the pathogen. The toxin is a sophisticated chlorinated 
cyclic pentapeptide chemically. Studies on the built environment show that the plasma 
membrane is the toxin’s main target. Here, it appears to attach to proteins and, through 
an as-yet-unidentified process, affects the metabolism of cells that are sensitive.

T toxin

The fungus Cochliobolus heterostrophus, formerly known as Helminthosporium maidis, 
causes the common corn disease known as “Southern Corn Leaf Blight” that produces 
the toxin. Race T of the fungus, which first arrived in the United States in 1968, is 
responsible for producing T-toxin. By 1970, corn with Texas male-sterile (TMS) 
cytoplasm experienced significant losses all across the corn belt. It was discovered 
that corn cultivars with normal cytoplasm were resistant to both the fungus and 
the toxin. Chemically speaking, the toxin is a combination of long, linear polyketols 
with 35–45 carbon atoms (Horbach et al., 2011). 

67

The toxin only affects susceptible cells’ mitochondria, where ATP generation 
is suppressed. The T-urf13 gene, which is expressed in the inner membrane of 
mitochondria, produces a 13 kDa protein with 115 amino acids as its target in plants 
that are vulnerable to it. The uncoupling/dissipation of membrane energization, 
mitochondrial enlargement, leaking of mitochondrial NAD+, and ensuing suppression 
of respiration are all caused by the T toxin binding to this protein (Manici et al., 1997).

Hc-Toxin 

The HC-Toxin, which causes maize leaf spot disease, is made by the fungus Cochliobolus 
carbonum (Helminthosporium). Only selected maize (corn) lines have the toxin. The 
maize pathogen’s host-selective toxin, HC toxin, prevented maize histone deacetylase 
from working. By interfering with reversible histone acetylation, which is thought to 
be involved in the regulation of essential cellular processes such chromatin structure, 
cell cycle progression, and gene expression, HC toxin aids in the establishment of 
pathogenic compatibility between C. carbonum and maize. 

Conclusion

Pathogenesis is the key determinant for disease development. The events in disease 
cycle includes host recognition, infection, invasion, colonization, growth and 
reproduction of pathogen, symptom development, dissemination of pathogen, 
incubation, attachment, penetration and finally the disease development. For the events 
to occur toxins and enzymes plays the major role in development. The pathogens 
developed numerous strategies in invading and colonizing the plant parts where 
toxins and enzymes are being used as the important determinants to overcome the 
defense imparted by plants thus ultimately helps in the establishment of infections. 

The major roles of enzymes and toxins in plant pathogenesis are utilization of 
enzymes in cell wall degradation, toxins imparting damage to host tissues, toxins 
required in the interference of host defense mechanisms, and various enzymes for 
photosynthates acquisition and the detoxification of plant defense. Toxins and 
enzymes have both quantitative and qualitative aspects. The severity of disease 
development depends on these components. The diverse spectrum of their potential 
uses is illustrated by the fact that the poisonous proteins produced by plants can 
have either positive or negative impacts on people and animals. By producing and 
storing a variety of chemical and protein-based poisonous chemicals, plants have 
evolved a sophisticated defensive system to recognize and react to invasive species. 

There are several secondary plant substances that have been identified, including 
ribosome-inactivating proteins, lectins, plant protease inhibitors, -amylase inhibitors, 
canatoxin-like proteins, ureases, arcelin, antimicrobial peptides, and pore-forming toxins. 

68

References

Due to their biological properties, these substances have been used by humans in a wide 
range of sectors, including the production of drugs, natural herbicides, therapeutic/
pharmaceutical agents, and genetic applications in agriculture and medicine. 

Annis, S. L., & Goodwin, P. H. (1997). Recent advances in the molecular genetics of 
plant cell wall-degrading enzymes produced by plant pathogenic fungi. European 
Journal of Plant Pathology, 103, 1-14.

Asemoloye, M. D., Marchisio, M. A., Gupta, V. K., & Pecoraro, L. (2021). Genome-
based engineering of ligninolytic enzymes in fungi. Microbial cell factories, 20, 1-18.

Brader, G., Compant, S., Vescio, K., Mitter, B., Trognitz, F., Ma, L. J., & Sessitsch, 
A. (2017). Ecology and genomic insights into plant-pathogenic and plant-
nonpathogenic endophytes. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 55, 61-83.

Bronson, C. R. (1991). The genetics of phytotoxin production by plant pathogenic 

fungi. Experientia, 47, 771-776.

Daub, M. E., Herrero, S., & Chung, K. R. (2005). Photoactivated perylenequinone toxins 

in fungal pathogenesis of plants. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 252(2), 197-206.

Doehlemann, G., Ökmen, B., Zhu, W., & Sharon, A. (2017). Plant pathogenic 

fungi. Microbiology spectrum, 5(1), 5-1.

Durbin, R. (Ed.). (2012). Toxins in plant disease. Elsevier.

Horbach, R., Navarro-Quesada, A. R., Knogge, W., & Deising, H. B. (2011). When 
and how to kill a plant cell: infection strategies of plant pathogenic fungi. Journal 
of plant physiology, 168(1), 51-62.

Horbach, R., Navarro-Quesada, A. R., Knogge, W., & Deising, H. B. (2011). When 
and how to kill a plant cell: infection strategies of plant pathogenic fungi. Journal 
of plant physiology, 168(1), 51-62.

Khan, T. A., Mazid, M., & Mohammad, F. (2011). Role of ascorbic acid against 
pathogenesis in plants. Journal of Stress Physiology & Biochemistry, 7(3), 222-234.

Kimura, M., Anzai, H., & Yamaguchi, I. (2001). Microbial toxins in plant-pathogen 
interactions: Biosynthesis, resistance mechanisms, and significance. The Journal 
of general and applied microbiology, 47(4), 149-160.

King, B. C., Waxman, K. D., Nenni, N. V., Walker, L. P., Bergstrom, G. C., & 
Gibson, D. M. (2011). Arsenal of plant cell wall degrading enzymes reflects host 
preference among plant pathogenic fungi. Biotechnology for biofuels, 4(1), 1-14.

Logrieco, A., Moretti, A., & Solfrizzo, M. (2009). Alternaria toxins and plant diseases: 

69

an overview of origin, occurrence and risks. World Mycotoxin Journal, 2(2), 129-140.

Ma, Y., Han, C., Chen, J., Li, H., He, K., Liu, A., & Li, D. (2015). Fungal cellulase is an 
elicitor but its enzymatic activity is not required for its elicitor activity. Molecular 
plant pathology, 16(1), 14-26.

Manici, L. M., Lazzeri, L., & Palmieri, S. (1997). In vitro fungitoxic activity of some 
glucosinolates and their enzyme-derived products toward plant pathogenic 
fungi. Journal of agricultural and food chemistry, 45(7), 2768-2773.

Pfeilmeier, S., Caly, D. L., & Malone, J. G. (2016). Bacterial pathogenesis of plants: 
future challenges from a microbial perspective: challenges in bacterial molecular 
plant pathology. Molecular plant pathology, 17(8), 1298-1313.

Scheffer, R. P. (1991). Role of toxins in evolution and ecology of plant pathogenic 

fungi. Experientia, 47, 804-811.

Sexton, A. C., & Howlett, B. J. (2006). Parallels in fungal pathogenesis on plant and 

animal hosts. Eukaryotic cell, 5(12), 1941-1949.

Sharma, N., & Gautam, A. K. (2019). Early pathogenicity events in plant pathogenic 
fungi: A comprehensive review. In Biol. Forum (Vol. 11, No. 1, pp. 24-34).

Trail,  F.,  &  Köller, W.  (1990).  Diversity  of  cutinases  from  plant  pathogenic 
fungi: Evidence for a relationship between enzyme properties and tissue 
specificity. Physiological and molecular plant pathology, 36(6), 495-508.

Tucker, S. L., & Talbot, N. J. (2001). Surface attachment and pre-penetration stage 
development by plant pathogenic fungi. Annual review of phytopathology, 39(1), 385-417.

Upadhyay,  A.,  Mooyottu,  S., Yin,  H.,  Surendran  Nair,  M.,  Bhattaram, V.,  & 
Venkitanarayanan, K. (2015). Inhibiting microbial toxins using plant-derived 
compounds and plant extracts. Medicines, 2(3), 186-211.

van der Does, H. C., & Rep, M. (2007). Virulence genes and the evolution of host 
specificity in plant-pathogenic fungi. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions, 20(10), 
1175-1182.

Vidhyasekaran, P. (2007). Fungal pathogenesis in plants and crops: molecular biology 

and host defense mechanisms. CRC Press.

Walton, J. D. (1996). Host-selective toxins: agents of compatibility. The plant 

cell, 8(10), 1723.

Yamane, H., Konno, K., Sabelis, M., Takabayashi, J., Sassa, T., & Oikawa, H. (2010). 

Chemical defence and toxins of plants.

70

6

Abstract

Infection Process During Fungal

Pathogen Interaction in Plants

Deepa R. Chandran, Saru Sara Sam and Alby John

P.h.D Scholars, Department of Plant Pathology, College of Agriculture, Vellayani, 
Kerala Agricultural University, Thiruvananthapuram - 695522, Kerala

In this chapter, the typical pathogenic processes exhibited by fungi is discussed. The 
pathogenesis process of fungi is very intricate. In a nutshell, it involves the dispersal 
and arrival of an infectious particle in the vicinity of the host, adhesion to the host, 
recognition of the host which may happen even before the adhesion or attachment, 
penetration into the host, invasive growth within the host followed by lesion or 
symptom development in the host, and finally production of additional infectious 
particles for further dispersal and spread. This process is more or less cyclic. Digging 
deep into the infection process can pave way to development of novel strategies for 
managing many fungal diseases of crop plants that are even affecting the global 
economy.

Keywords: Fungi, pathogen, infection process, defence, colonisation

Introduction

Fungi is a group of eukaryotic carbon heterotrophic animals with a wide range of 
adaptations. They have successfully inhabited most of the natural settings. The bulk 
of fungus are stringent saprophytes, and only a part now recognized are able to 
colonize plants, and even fewer of them may spread disease. Phytopathogenic fungi 
are the primary cause of infectious diseases that affect crop plants, but they also play 
a significant role in the less dramatic but still significant yield losses that have made 
fungal pathogens a significant economic concern and drawn the attention of both 
farmers as well as scientists. 

71

It must be noted that the plants are constantly and permanently exposed to 
a wide variety of possible pathogens. The development of disease is only possible 
if there is presence of a simultaneous combination of a susceptible host, a virulent 
pathogen, and a conducive environment.  In other words, not every pathogen can 
infect every plant, and not every plant is susceptible to all the phytopathogens. In 
actuality, only a very small percentage of these pathogens are able to successfully 
invade each plant host and spread illness. 

In addition, the pathogen population and host plant undergo developmental 
changes throughout their life cycles, which alter pathogen virulence and host 
vulnerability. According to Montesinos et al. (2002), environmental factors including 
temperature, water availability, and plant surface wetness have a significant impact 
on disease. For all of these factors, disease development is typically less common 
than one might anticipate. Moreover, plants have developed complex and wide 
range of defense mechanisms throughout the course of their interaction with the 
pathogens. Proteins and other chemical substances created by both organisms serve 
as the main weapons in a conflict when a pathogen, such as a fungus, tries to infect 
a plant. Plants create an incredible variety of defensive chemicals, and new ones are 
continually being found every day.

For a fungal pathogen to cause a disease in a plant, it has to undergo multiple 
stages of infection during the fungal-pathogen interactions. Here is an overall 
summary of the process:

72

Recognition and Attachment

The interaction between a fungal pathogen and a plant starts with a kind of 
communication between them. If the plant is a host, then it will recognise the 
pathogen and it will not happen in case of non-host plants. This recognition is aided 
with the help of some sensors/receptors present in the plant surface. These sensors 
will sense the incoming signals of pathogen which can be chemical or physical/
thigmotropic. The recognition can trigger the onset of a cascade of biochemical 
reactions within the plant as well as the pathogen.

Before causing disease, host as well as pathogen must overcome several challenges. 
A pathogen is typically a non-host pathogen if it is unable to overcome the initial 
barriers. The same hurdles pose substantial difficulties for host pathogens as well and 
sharply lower their success rates. Any normal plant-pathogen interaction begins with 
the pathogen recognizing the host and then being perceived by the host’s defensive 
mechanisms. To drive cell differentiation and produce crucial pathogenic genes, 
pathogens need particular signals from the plant surface (Thordal-Christensen, 2003). 
The timely perception of the pathogen by the plant is essential for the activation of 
defense mechanisms. 

Moreover, through air currents, soil, or vectors like insects, the fungus’ spores 
or hyphae typically come into touch with the plant’s surface. The spores adhere to 
the plant’s surface after identifying chemical signals from the surface.

Adhesion and Germination

Spores adhere to the host by both physical and chemical processes. The fungal spores 
develop into structures like appressoria or germ tubes that aid in their adhesion to 
the surface of the plant. Specialized organs called appressoria emit enzymes or apply 
mechanical pressure to aid in penetration.

According to Mendgen et al. (1996), the host’s hydrophobicity, surface hardness, 
plant surface components, and topographical characteristics are the primary signals. 
For instance, in the case of Phytophthora pathogens, both host-specific factors like 
isoflavones and non-host-specific factors like amino acids, calcium, and electrical fields 
influence zoospore taxis, encystment, cyst germination, and hyphal chemotropism, 
which are significant in directing the pathogen to potential infection sites (Tyler, 
2002). 

Some plant pathogens can detect many kinds of anticlinal walls or stomatal 
apertures, thanks to thigmotropic responses that direct germ tubes on leaf surfaces. 
While the composition of the surface wax is crucial for the establishment of a 
differentiated appressorium in barely powdery mildew fungus, hyphal differentiation 

73

of rust fungus is driven by the topography of the plant’s surface (Hoch and Staples, 
1991).

Another illustration is given by Colletotrichum gloesporioides and C. musae, the 
rot-causing pathogens in climacteric fruits like tomato and banana (Musa spp.), 
respectively. These organisms use the signal provided by the fruit-ripening hormone 
ethylene for germination and differentiation (Flaishman and Kolattukudy, 1994). 
When these fungi’s conidia are exposed to micromolar amounts of ethylene, the 
conidia begin to germinate and produce many appressoria on hard surfaces. Exogenous 
ethylene had to be added for transgenic tomato fruits incapable of producing ethylene 
to enable fungal germination and apressorium development.

Broad bean, the host of the rust fungus Uromyces fabae, releases volatile chemicals 
in response. In tests conducted in vitro without the presence of the host, the fungus 
detects these volatiles. On artificial membranes, the growth of haustoria is encouraged 
by three of them - nonanal, decanal, and hexenyl acetate (Mendgen et al., 2006).

One fungus may react differently to signals sent by the same plant surface 
depending on its stage of life (Mendgen et al., 1996). Thus, for instance, the dikaryotic 
stage of Uromyces appendiculatus differentiates appressoria in response to the proper 
dimensions of a ridge formed by the stomatal lips of the guard cell, whereas the 
monokaryotic stage of this organism differentiates infection structures in response 
to its hardness (Freytag and Mendgen, 1991).

In order for the fungal structures to adhere passively or non-metabolically to 
host surfaces, hydrophobic interactions between spores, hyphae, and the cuticle are 
frequently present. To help hyphae sense the plant surface and distinguish between 
distinct infection structures, a second stage involves the production of a protein, 
glycoprotein, or carbohydrate coating surrounding the germ tube and portions of the 
cuticle (Mendgen et al., 1996). According to some spores’ production of cutinases or 
esterases, the cuticle is eroded and aids in fungal adherence (Deising et al., 1992).

Penetration 

Next step following adherence is penetration. By physically breaking through the 
cell wall or by using enzymatic processes to break down the cell wall constituents, 
the fungal hyphae enter the plant’s epidermal cells. The fungus can infiltrate the 
plant tissues after making successful penetration. Likewise, the transition from 
extracellular to invasive growth is also marked by penetration through the cuticle 
and the plant cell wall, which is a critical and essential step in the pathogenesis of 
most biotrophic fungi (Panstruga and Schulze-Lefert, 2003).

Amazingly diverse invasive techniques have been developed by fungi. They 

74

have developed methods to infiltrate plant tissue, enhance plant development, and 
reproduce in order to colonize plants. Natural openings or wounds are a common 
entry point for bacteria, viruses, and some opportunistic fungal parasites. Contrarily, 
many real phytopathogenic fungi have developed means of actively navigating the 
cuticle and epidermal cell wall, the plant’s outer structural barrier.  The penetration 
of the cuticle and plant cell wall is supported by targeted and controlled secretion 
of cutinases and a variety of cell wall-degrading enzymes, production of phytotoxic 
metabolites like mycotoxins and oxalic acid, and/or an increase in pressure within 
the fungal infection structures for causing physical punctures (Punja, 2001).

Fungi typically release a mixture of hydrolytic enzymes, such as cutinases, 
cellulases, pectin lyases, pectate lyase, polygalacturonase, and proteases, to gain 
entry. These enzymes are also necessary for their saprophytic lifestyle. Additionally, 
not all hydrolytic enzymes may be strictly necessary for penetration. However, this 
does not rule out tailoring their structure or biosynthetic regulation to the unique 
requirements of a pathogen on a particular host plant. Cutinase is thought to be 
a critical role in the penetration process, and it has been proposed that enzymatic 
breakdown of cutin, the structural polymer of the plant cuticle, is essential for fungal 
pathogenicity. It may also play a role in the prepenetration process, for example, by 
modifying the cuticle’s adhesive properties to make it easier for fungi to attach to 
plant surfaces, or by releasing signal molecules necessary for the early development 
of fungi on plants (Kolattukudy et al., 1995).

Fig A: Spore germination and entry via direct penetration (source: Sharma and 
Jangid, 2017)

Some fungi, as an alternative to or in addition to hydrolytic enzymes, have 
created a more intricate and sophisticated method to pierce the cuticle of host 
plants (Fig A.). Appressoria, which are specialized penetration organs that are 
formed by phytopathogenic fungi at the tip of their germ tubes, are firmly adhered 

75

to the plant surface by extracellular adhesives. Melanin incorporation significantly 
reduces the porosity of the appressorium wall of mechanically penetrating fungi as 
it grows, allowing considerable turgor pressure to accumulate inside. A small region 
at the base of the appressorium that is kept free of wall material and melanin is 
where this pressure is most effectively concentrated. An infection peg grows from 
this penetration pore and penetrates the cuticle and cell wall, perhaps with the aid 
of hydrolytic enzymes. Studies on the Magnaporthe grisea, the rice blast fungus, 
have demonstrated the significance of melanin for infection peg penetration (Kubo 
and Furusawa, 1991). Additionally, according to Howard et al. (1991), melanized 
appressoria of M. grisea are capable of forcing penetration pegs through polymeric 
membranes. 

Fig B: Spore germination and entry into host via stomata (source: Sharma and 
Jangid, 2017)

Other fungal species, such as certain rusts, lack a direct penetration method and 
instead enter through the stomata, avoiding the plant cuticle and outer cell wall 
(Fig B.). To find these perforations on the plant surface, these fungi have evolved a 
poorly known mechanism. 

Therefore, it is possible that a variety of factors will work together to control 
penetration. These elements may also include plant surface features, fungal spore 
germination and germ tube activators or inhibitors, as well as fungus-specific chemicals.

Infection and Colonization

The fungal hyphae continue to develop and spread once they have entered the 
plant, either by entering the plant cells directly or through the intercellular gaps. 
The development of either haustoria or intracellular hyphae is a characteristic of 
the obligatory biotrophic fungus and some of the hemibiotrophic fungi. Following 

76

penetration of the cell wall, these structures form inside the plant cell and are encircled 
by an invaginated plant plasma membrane. Haustoria are determinate branches of 
intercellular, intracellular, or epicuticular hyphae that terminate within a host cell 
(in the case of powdery mildews). Contrarily, many intracellular hyphae can move 
from cell to cell and still resemble haustoria in both function and structure (Fig B.). 
Haustoria and intracellular hyphae have been linked to signaling, communication, 
and avoiding recognition by the host in addition to acquiring water and nutrients 
from the host.

To obtain nutrients and resources, the fungus secretes enzymes and toxins that 
aid in destroying plant cell walls. These toxins and enzymes degrade the plant cells 
and release monomers that can serve as the ready to use carbon source for the fungal 
pathogens. The release of toxins or substances that resemble plant hormones, which 
alter the physiology of the plant to the pathogen’s advantage, is frequently the following 
step in a fungal attempt to colonize a plant species after penetration. This interference 
can simply include destroying plant cells to prevent them from absorbing nutrients 
or it can involve a more subtle rerouting of the cellular machinery (Keen, 1986). It 
is frequently accomplished by the development of phytotoxins that are more or less 
specific to particular plants. While some toxins are active in a variety of plant species, 
others are host-selective. Toxins are the factors that determine specificity in some 
plant-fungus interactions, according to genetic and biochemical research. In these 
circumstances, sensitivity to the toxins or resistance to the fungus always correspond 
with one another. This has led to a lot of interest in these host-selective toxins, which 
are mostly generated by species of the fungi Alternaria and Cochliobolus. Host-
nonselective toxins, on the other hand, affect both hosts and nonhost organisms.

These toxins may be extremely important throughout the progression of 
fungal disease on a specific host, despite the fact that their non-selectivity conflicts 
with a role in determining host range. They could also be seen as relics of earlier 
fungal evolutions toward phytopathogenicity, whose activity in most plants may be 
suppressed by detoxification or other processes.

Plant Defense Response

Plants are constantly exposed to a wide range of pathogens. However, only a few 
number of these pathogens can actually infect each type of plant with illness. On 
the other hand, only a small number of plants are susceptible to each pathogen’s 
illness. By definition, all other plants are non-host plants, and the invading organisms 
are non-host pathogens. A plant is said to be resistant to a disease if it is unable to 
attack it, which indicates that the plant is resistant to the pathogen and it cannot 
live on the plant. 

77

Once the pathogen gains entry, the plant starts developing a defense as soon as 
it notices the infection. This may entail the induction of defense genes, the creation of 
antimicrobial substances, the fortification of cell walls, and the attraction of immune 
cells to the site of the infection. Fungal pathogens are likely to be recognized by 
plants quickly after coming into contact with them and will be met with an active 
defensive mechanism. Therefore, it is obvious that an effective surveillance system is 
essential for early danger detection and the subsequent activation of defense-specific 
enzymes that operate to halt future fungal development. Successful pathogens must 
then counteract the plant’s defense mechanism, and so on. The highly developed 
plant-fungus interactions are evidence of such coevolutionary dynamics.

Early pathogen detection by the plant is essential for the induction of defense 
responses. The term elicitor is currently frequently used to describe any molecule 
that sets off a plant defensive response, while being originally intended to describe 
any substance capable of stimulating the formation of phytoalexins. Molecules of 
pathogen origin (exogenous elicitors) or host components released or altered by 
pathogen effectors (endogenous elicitors) are also included in this expanded definition 
of an elicitor (Nurnberger, 1999). Examples of elicitors that have been isolated from 
the necrotrophic fungus Botrytis cinerea include botrycin and cinerein.

Two main categories of elicitors – general/non-specific, and specific/race-specific 
elicitors—can be distinguished based on mode of action. It appears that the activation 
of the first line of plant defenses is mediated by general elicitors, which comprise 
proteins, glycoproteins, peptides, polysaccharides, and lipids. They are emitted during 
attacks by both host and non-host pathogens, and they alert both host and non-
host plants to the probable presence of pathogens in a non-cultivar-specific way 
(Nurnberger, 1999; Thordal-Christensen, 2003). General elicitors are clearly essential 
for the rejection of non-host pathogens, as is becoming increasingly clear. Due to 
receptor-mediated sensing, they invariably reveal the invader to the plant’s defense 
system and are frequently constitutive and important for the pathogen lifetime 
(Nurnberger et al., 2004). When the pathogen is entering the host, general elicitors 
are released through the enzymatic breakdown of pathogen cell wall polymers. Such 
elicitors, such as chitin and glucan oligomers, are frequently necessary to the microbe 
and are hypothesized to be used by plants during recognition. However, given that 
some of them are only recognized by a small number of plants, the non-specific 
nature of generic elicitors is relative (Shibuya and Minami, 2001). 

Race-specific elicitors are virulence effectors or avirulence factors that are 
unique and specific for a certain pathogen and display restricted specificity, frequently 
inducing reactions in a cultivar-specific manner. Specific elicitors, as opposed to 
general elicitors, are expressed by avr genes and cause cultivar-specific responses, 

78

which are frequently accompanied with hypersensitive response. According to the 
gene-for-gene concept, this particular recognition is controlled by the direct or 
indirect interaction of host R proteins with relevant pathogen-derived avr effectors 
(Caldo et al., 2004). When the complementary protein equivalents of the R-gene 
are able to recognize the avr factors, they function as specialized elicitors of plant 
defense rather than virulence or pathogenic factors. For example, tomato plants 
expressing the Cf-9 resistance gene will experience HR when exposed to the Cf 
avr9 produced by the tomato leaf mold, Cladosporium fulvum (Van der Hoorn et 
al., 2002; Lauge et al., 2000).

Symptom Development

The manifestation of disease symptoms may depend on the particular interaction 
between the plant and the fungus infection. Symptoms caused by fungi might be 
widespread or limited. Most frequently, fungal infections result in general necrosis 
of the host tissue and frequently cause stunting, deformities, and aberrant alterations 
in the tissue and organs of plants. These symptoms may include wilting, necrosis, 
chlorosis, lesions, aberrant growth, and a general deterioration in plant health. In 
most situations, lesion formation is the ultimate outcome of infection.

The physical appearance of pathogen, sign, is one of the most recognizable 
and easily distinguishable traits of a fungal infection. For the accurate identification 
and diagnosis of a disease, look for hyphae, mycelia, fruiting bodies, and spores of 
the fungus pathogen. Fungi produce fruiting structures that range in size from 
microscopic to macroscopic. They have distinctive qualities and are available in a 
variety of shapes and arrangements. In most situations, the disease can be accurately 
identified using the fruiting bodies, spores, and mycelium (signs).

The following symptoms are common in fungal infections whether alone or in 

combination with other fungal pathogens:

Leaf spots caused by fungi frequently appear as isolated lesions with collapsed 
and necrotic tissue. Leaf spots typically have a dry texture, but they are not papery-
dry. E.g brown leaf spot of rice (Cochliobolus miyabeanus)

Anthracnose is a lesion that resembles an ulcer and may be necrotic and sunken. 
These lesions can develop on the host’s fruit, flowers, and stems, for example., 
anthracnose of pulses caused by Colletotrichum spp.

Rusts: Infected plants frequently develop several small lesions on stems or 
leaves. These lesions are typically rust-coloured; however they can also be black or 
white. E.g., wheat stem rust

Smuts are cluster of spores or mycelium that appear on seeds as galls or as seeds 

79

that have been replaced by spores as in heads smut of barley

Often sunken, a canker is a localized necrotic lesion on woody tissue, such as 

European Canker in apple (Nectria galligena), 

Damping off is the term for a seedling’s sudden collapse and death. Either 
the seed rots before it sprouts, or the seedling rots at the soil line, collapses, and 
perishes. This illness is brought on by a number of soil-born fungi including Pythium, 
Rhizoctonia, and Fusarium.

Dieback refers to the progressive death of shoots and twigs, which typically 
begins at the affected plant part’s tip. E.g. Cherry and Apple dieback (Monilinia sp.).

Soft and dry root rots cause the rot and decomposition of fleshy leaves, roots, 
tubers, and fruit. e.g: Phytophthora Root Rot (P. cinnamomi) and Armaillaria spp. 
Tree Root Rot.

Blight is characterized by the rapid, widespread browning and death of leaves, 
floral components, stems, and branches. Examples are potato late blight (Phytophthora 
infestans) and tomato early blight (Alternaria tomatophilai, previously A. solani). 

Wilts are loss of overall turgidity in the vascular tissue. E.g., Verticillium wilt 

of cowpea. 

Mildews Powdery and downy mildews 

Scab is a small, localized lesion on the host plant’s leaves, fruits, tubers, and 
other plant parts.  Scab causes the host’s skin to become rough and crusty. Example 
include Apple Scab caused by Venturia inaequalis.

Leaf curls are curled, thickened, and distorted leaves formed after the fungal 

infections in some plants, for example, Peach leaf curl caused by Taphrina sp.

Galls are swollen portions of plant organs that are typically brought on by 
excessive plant cell growth or multiplication, such as the clubroot of crucifers 
(Plasmodiophora brassicae).

Sporulation and Dispersal

The pathogen will colonise the plant and at some points of unfavourable conditions 
they start to convert their vegetative cells to reproductive structures or directly 
spores. Although direct infection by hyphae is possible, the most typical way for 
new infections to start is by spore dispersal. Spores can be of different types sexual 
or asexual, endospores or exospores etc.  According to their motile nature, spores can 
be divided into two categories, motile and non-motile spores. Non-motile spores 
include sexual spores such as oospores, ascospores, rust urediniospores, sclerotia, 

80

and conidiospores and asexual spores like sporangiospores, and conidia. Motile 
spores include zoospores, or mobile spores with flagella, which are common among 
oomycetes and chytrid fungi. 

These spores that a fungal pathogen develops can be spread by a variety of 
agents, including wind, water, insects, and human activity. These spores allow the 
disease to spread to other host plants and keep the infection cycle going. The spores 
land on appropriate substrate (host plant part) following the dispersal and repeat 
the infection cycle.

Conclusion

It is vital to remember that different fungal infections and plant species can have 
diverse infection processes. The effectiveness of the interaction between the pathogen’s 
virulence and the plant’s defense responses depends on the balance of defense 
mechanisms that plants have evolved to combat fungal infections. Some fungi 
complete only one infection cycle in host whereas certain others complete multiple 
infection cycles within the same host plant. Based on the pathogen, host as well as 
the environment the pattern and form of the infection process may vary. All these 
have to be taken into account while formulating management strategies for warding 
off the fungal diseases in plants.

References

Caldo, R.A., Nettleton, D., and Wise, R. P. (2004). Interaction-dependent gene expression 

in Mla-specified response to barley powdery mildew. Plant Cell 16: 2514–2528.

Deising, H., Nicholson, R. L., Haug, M., Howard, R. J., and Mendgen, K. (1992). 
Adhesion pad formation and the involvement of cutinase and esterases in the 
attachment of uredospores to the host cuticle. Plant Cell 4: 1101– 1111.

Flaishman, M. A., and Kolattukudy, P. E. (1994). Timing of fungal invasion using 
host’s ripening hormone as a signal. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91: 6579– 6583. 

Freytag, S., and Mendgen, K. (1991). Carbohydrates on the surface of urediniospore- 
and basidiospore-derived infection structures of heteroecious and autoecious 
rust fungi. New Phytologist 119: 527–534. 

Hoch, H., and Staples, R. (1991). Signaling for infection structure formation in 
fungi. In: The Fungal Spore and Disease Initiation in Plants and Animals. 25. 
Hoch, H., Ed., Plenum Press, New York.

Keen, N.T. (1986). Pathogenic strategies of fungi. In Recognition in Microbe-Plant 
Symbiotic and Pathogenic Interactions, B. Lugtenberg, ed (Berlin: Springer-
Verlag). pp. 171-188.

81

Kolattukudy, P.E., Rogers, L.M., Li, D., Hwang, C.S., and Flaishman, M.A. (1995). 
Surface signaling in pathogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 4080-4087.

Kubo,Y., and Furusawa, I. (1991). Melanin biosynthesis. Prerequisite for successful 
invasion of the host by appressoria of Colletotrichum and Pyricularia. In: The 
Fungal Spore and Disease Initiation in Plants and Animals. 205. Hoch, H., 
Ed., Plenum, New York.

Lauge, R., Goodwin, P. H., de Wit, P. J., and Joosten, M. H. (2000). Specific HR-
associated recognition of secreted proteins from Cladosporium fulvum occurs 
in both host and non-host plants. Plant J. 23: 735–745.

Mendgen, K., Hahn, M., and Deising, H. (1996). Morphogenesis and mechanisms of 
penetration by plant pathogenic fungi. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 34: 367– 386.

Mendgen, K.,Wirsel, S. G., Jux, A., Hoffmann, J., and Boland,W. (2006).Volatiles 
modulate the development of plant pathogenic rust fungi. Planta In press.

Montesinos, E., Bonaterra, A., Badosa, E., Franc´es, J., Alemany, J., Llorente, I., and 
Moragrega, C. (2002). Plant-microbe interactions and the new biotechnological 
methods of plant disease control. Int. Microbiol. 5: 169–175.

N¨urnberger, T. (1999). Signal perception in plant pathogen defense. Cell. Mol. Life 

Sci. (CMLS) 55: 167–182.

Nurnberger, T., Brunner, F., Kemmerling, B., and Piater, L. (2004). Innate immunity 
in plants and animals: striking similarities and obvious differences. Immunol. 
Rev. 198: 249–266.

Panstruga, R., and Schulze-Lefert, P. (2003). Corruption of host seven transmembrane 
proteins by pathogenic microbes: a common theme in animals and plants? 
Microbes Infect. 5: 429–437.

Punja, Z. (2001). Genetic engineering of plants to enhance resistance to fungal pathogen 

- a review of progress and future prospects. Can. J. Plant Pathol. 23: 216–235.

Repka,V. (2006). Early defence responses induced by two distinct elicitors derived 
from a Botrytis cinerea in grapevine leaves and cell suspensions. Biol. Plant., 
50: 94–106.

Sharma,  R.,  and  Jangid,  K.  (2017).  Role  of  Quorum  Sensing  in  Fungal 
Morphogenesis and  athogenesis. In: Mérillon, JM., Ramawat, K. (eds) Fungal 
Metabolites. Reference Series in Phytochemistry. Springer, Cham. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-25001-4_38

Shibuya, N., and Minami, E. (2001). Oligosaccharide signalling for defence responses 

in plant. Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol. 59: 223–233.  

82

Thordal-Christensen, H. (2003). Fresh insights into processes of nonhost resistance. 

Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 6: 351–357.

Tyler, B. M. (2002). Molecular basis of recognition between phytophthora pathogens 

and their hosts. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 40: 137–167.

Van der Hoorn, R. A., DeWit, P. J., and Joosten, M. H. (2002). Balancing selection 

favors guarding resistance proteins. Trends Plant Sci. 7: 67–71.

83

7

Pathogen Defense

Mechanism in Plants

H. A. Shekhada1, C. M. Bhaliya2, J. J. Padsala3 and  R. L. Joshi4
1Ph.D.  Scholar,  Department  of  Plant  Pathology,  College  of  Agriculture,                                                    
Junagadh Agricultural University, ( Junagadh) 362 001
2Assistant Research Scientist, Department of Plant Pathology, College of Agriculture,                                                    
Junagadh Agricultural University, ( Junagadh) 362 001
3Ph.D. Scholar, Navsari Agricultural University, (Navsari) 369 450
4Ph.D. Scholar, Navsari Agricultural University, (Navsari) 369 450

Abstract

Higher plant’s ability to withstand stress is vital to their existence. As consequently, 
plants have evolved to adapt to stress through modifications to their normal patterns 
of defense mechanism. In response to a pathogen attack, every plant has a wide 
spectrum of defense mechanisms, including first and foremost structural defense 
mechanisms and later cellular defense mechanisms as a result of host-pathogen 
interactions. These mechanisms include the production of waxes, small and thick 
cuticle, natural opening structures, cork layer, abscission layer, Tyloses formation, gum 
deposition, hyphal sheathing, hypersensitive response (HR), antimicrobial substance 
present and release by plant, secondary metabolites such as phytoalexins, PR proteins 
and others. The role of the structural and biochemical defense mechanisms of plants 
against pathogen such as fungi, bacteria, viruses, nematodes, and others has been 
demonstrated and described in this chapter.

Keyword: Structural and biochemical defense mechanisms

Introduction

Plant lacking an immune system comparable to animals. Each type of pathogen, 
such as fungi, bacteria, viruses, mycoplasma, nematodes, etc., has the capacity to harm 

84

a plant. Crop yields may be drastically decreased by certain infections. However, 
because of their defense mechanisms, many plants do survive despite being attacked by 
these pathogens. Plants respond to pathogen attack by erecting a highly coordinated 
series of molecular, cellular and tissue-based defense barriers. All plants have the 
capacity to activate these defenses. However, if they are activated too little, too late, 
or in the wrong place, they will fail to restrict the pathogen and the plant will be 
susceptible. Pathogens respond by escaping or suppressing plant defense responses or 
by rendering these responses impotent, for example by detoxifying plant antibiotics. 

Plants employ a combination of defense mechanisms known as host resistance 
against pathogens, which include (1) structural defense mechanism that act as physical 
barriers and prevent the pathogen from entering and spreading through the plant; 
and (2) biochemical defense mechanism occurring in the plant’s cells and tissues and 
produce substances that are either toxic to the pathogen or that create conditions 
that inhibit the pathogen from establishing in the plant. Different host-pathogen 
systems are made up of structural characteristics and metabolic reactions that are 
used for the defense of plants. But despite the type of defense or resistance a host 
plant uses to ward off a disease or an abiotic agent, it is ultimately determined by 
the genetic makeup of both the host plant and the pathogen (genes), either directly 
or indirectly (Tom Schultz, 2007).

Structural defense mechanisms

The surface of the host is first line of defense against the pathogen. The pathogen 
must adhere to the surface and penetrate, if it is to cause infection. Structural defense 
mechanism is mainly two type: 1. Pre-existing structural defense mechanism (Wax, 
Thick cuticle, Thickness and toughness of the outer wall of epidermal cells, Stomata, 
Sclerenchyma cells and Lenticel) and 2. Post-infectional or induced structural 
defense mechanism (Cellular defense structure- hyphal sheathing and Histological 
defense structure- formation of cork layer, formation of abscission layer, formation 
of tyloses and deposition of gums). Saprophytes lack the ability to penetrate these 
natural barriers.

Pre-existing structural defense mechanism

Cuticular wax: Wax-mixtures of long chain aliphatic compounds get deposited on 
the cuticular surface of some plants. Deposition of wax on the cuticular surface is 
thought to play a defensive role by It is synthesized by epidermis and extremely 
hydrophobic. As a result, the pathogen does not get sufficient water to germinate 
or multiply. In addition, a negative charge usually develops on the leaf surface due 
to the presence of fatty acids – the main component of cuticle. The negative charge 

85

prevents/reduces the chance of infection by many pathogens. It forms a protective 
coating on plant leaves and fruit. Fungi which degrade the wax is Puccinia hordei. 
Generally wax layer is not degraded by the pathogen, thicker the wax layer more is 
the resistance.

Cuticle and Epidermal cell: Plant structures like tough and thick epidermal cells 
play a role in defense against pathogens, these are important factors in the resistance 
of some plants to certain pathogens by making direct penetration fungal pathogens 
difficult or impossible. Ex: Disease resistance in Barberry species infected with Puccinia 
graminis tritici has been attributed to the tough outer epidermal cells with a thick 
cuticle. Similarly, the ability of Taphrina deformans to infect only young, newly unfolded 
leaves has been attributed to the inability of germ tubes to penetrate the thicker 
cuticles of older leaves. In linseed, cuticle acts as a barrier against Melampsora lini. 

The wall having same thickness, but differing in toughness due to the presence 
or absence of lignin and silicic acid, which prevent the further spread of pathogen. Ex: 
Silicification and lignification of epidermal cells offers protection against Pyricularia 
oryzae and Streptomyces scabies in paddy and potato, respectively. The activity of this 
type of cutinolytic enzyme in isolates of Fusarium solani and Fusarium oxysporum 
f. sp. pisi is directly related to their aggressiveness on pea stems, indicating that 
pathogens unable to dissolve the cuticle at the point of penetration are exclude 
(David and John, 1997).

Sclerenchyma cells: The presence of secondary cell walls in sclerenchyma, 
xylem or older plant tissue often retards pathogen development, Brittle cells help 
in mechanical support of the plant. Example, to angular leaf spots where pathogen 
spread is restricted by leaf veins.

Structure of natural opening 

Stomata: Most of pathogen enters plants through natural openings. Puccinia graminis 
f.sp. tritici wheat enters the host only when the stomata are open. Uredospores 
germinate early in the morning and stomata of wheat crop are also remain open in 
the morning at 6 am that enables entry of germ tube of uredospore. Hope cultivar of 
wheat is resistant to Puccinia graminis f.sp. tritici because the stomata in Hope cultivar 
are opens at 9 am in the morning, during that time the germ tube of germinated 
in the morning will dries up (Tom Schultz, 2007). Structure of stomata provides 
resistance to penetration by certain pathogenic bacteria. Ex: Citrus variety, Szinkum, 
is resistant to citrus canker because the smaller size of stomatal opening.

The black pod pathogen, Phytophthora palmivora, enters cocoa pods through 
stomata. Cocoa genotypes that produce pods with few and relatively smaller stomata, 

86

allow fewer lesions to establish than genotypes with more numerous, larger stomata. 
Not surprisingly, as the pathogen enters through stomatal pores, there is no correlation 
between cuticle thickness or pod case hardness and resistance to black pod.

Lenticels: Lenticels are openings on fruit, stem and tubers that are filled with 
loosely connected cells that allow the passage of air. Shape and internal structure 
of lenticels can increase or decreases the incidence of fruit diseases. Ex. Small and 
suberized lenticels will resist potato scab pathogen, Streptomyces scabies. 

Nectaries: It provides openings in the epidermis and may play a defensive role due 
to high osmotic concentration of the nectar. In resistant varieties of apple, presence 
of abundant hairs in the nectaries acts as a defense mechanism while susceptible 
varieties are devoid of abundant hairs.

Hydathodes: Black rot of cabbage is internally seed borne disease, it enters through 
the hydathodes.

Post-infectional/Induced structural defense mechanism 

Most of the pathogens manage to penetrate their hosts through wounds and natural 
opening and to produce various degree of infection. Pathogen penetration through 
the host surface induced the structural defense mechanism in the host cells. These 
may be regarded as: Histological defense barriers (cork layer, abscission layers and 
tyloses formation) and cellular defense structures (hyphal sheathing).

Histological defense mechanism 

Cork layers formation: Infection by fungi, bacteria, some viruses and nematodes 
induce plants to form several layers of cork cells beyond the point of infection. These 
cork cells inhibit the further invasion by the pathogen beyond the initial lesion and 
also blocks the spread of toxic substances secreted by the pathogen. It also stops the 
flow of nutrients and water from the healthy to the infected area and deprive the 
pathogen nourishment. Examples of cork layer formation as a result of infection are: 
soft not of potato caused by Rhizopus sp., potato tuber disease caused by Rhizoctonia 
sp., Scab of potato caused by Streptomyces scabies and necrotic lesions on tobacco 
caused by tobacco mosaic virus.

Abscission layer: Abscission layers are usually formed to separate the ripe fruits 
and old leaves from the plant. But in some stone fruit trees, these layers develop 
in their young leaves in response to infection by several fungi, bacteria or viruses. 
An abscission layer consists of a gap formed between infected and healthy cells of 
leaf surrounding the locus of infection. Due to the disintegration of middle lamella 
of parenchymatous tissue. Gradually, infected area shrivels, dies, and sloughs off, 

87

carrying with it the pathogen. Abscission layer formation protects the healthy leaf 
tissue from the attack of the pathogen. Ex: Xanthomonas pruni on pomegranate and 
Closterosporium carpophylum on peach leaves.

Tyloses: Tyloses are the overgrowths of the protoplast of adjacent living parenchymatous 
cells, which protrude into xylem vessels through pits. Tyloses have cellulosic walls. It 
formed quickly ahead of the pathogen and may clog the xylem vessels completely 
blocking the further advance of the pathogen in resistant varieties. Ex: Tyloses form 
in xylem vessels of most plants under invasion by the vascular wilt pathogens caused 
by Fusarium oxysporum.

Gum deposition: Various types of gums are produced by many plants around lesions 
after infection by pathogen or injury. Gums secretion is most common in stone fruit 
trees but occurs in most plants. Generally, the gum is exudate by plant under stressed 
condition (Tom Schultz, 2007).

Cellular defense mechanism

Hyphal sheathing: The hyphae of fungi often get enveloped in a sheath as a result 
of the inward stretching of the cell wall. Due to the sheathing primary delays the 
penetration and imparts partial check to the spread of the pathogen e.g., Late 
blight of potato caused by Phytophthora infestans and in flax infected with Fusarium 
oxysporum f.sp. lini.

Biochemical defense mechanism

Exudates on the surfaces of plants or compounds in plant cells may stimulate or 
inhibit the development of pathogens. Sometimes, plants resist infection because they 
do not provide the pathogen with its required nutrients. Resting spores of pathogens 
such as Spongospora subterranean (powdery scab of potato), Urocystis agropyri (flag 
or leaf smut of wheat) and Plasmodiophora brassicae (club root of crucifers) and eggs 
of the potato cyst nematode, Globodera rostochiensis, require specific substances to 
stimulate germination or hatching. These are provided in secretions from certain 
plants, including potential hosts. Plants that fail to secrete these stimulators are 
resistant by default (David G. and John 1997). Biochemical defense mechanism is 
mainly two type: 1. Pre-existing biochemical defense mechanism ((Phytoanticipns) 
and 2. Post-infectional or induced biochemical defense mechanism (Hypersensitivity 
response (HR) and Production of Antimicrobial substances like Phytoalexins, PR 
proteins and Plantibodies).

Pre-existing biochemical defense mechanism

Although structural characteristics may provide a plant with various degree of defense 

88

against attacking pathogens. It is clear that the resistance of a plant against pathogen 
attack depends not so much on its structural barriers as on the substances produced 
in its cell before or after infection. Before infection or penetration of pathogens, 
host released some chemicals to defend themselves it is known as Phytoanticipns. 
It may be excreted into the external environment (e.g. rhizosphere or phylloplane), 
accumulate in dead cells or they may be sequestered in vacuoles in an inactive form.

Inhibitors present in plant cell: The plant cell contains certain pre-existing inhibitory 
substances which mainly play a defensive role against the particular pathogen. 
The antimicrobial substances which are pre-exist in plant cells includes cynogenic 
glycosides, sulphur containing compound, phenols and saponins (tomatin, solanin, 
etc.) e.g., Mustard contains isothiocynic acid, onions and garlic contains allyl 
sulphoxides. In Cicer arietinum (chickpea), the ascochyta blight resistant varieties have 
more glandular hairs which have maleic acid which inhibit spore germination. The 
dead cells of brown onion skins contain the quinones catechol and protocatechuic 
acid, which inhibit germination of spores of the smudge pathogen, Colletotrichum 
circinans and the neck rot pathogen, Botrytis cinerea. white onions do not produce 
these compounds and are susceptible to smudge. Aspergillus niger is insensitive to 
these inhibitors and attacks both white and brown onions. The resistance of immature 
apples and pears to scab, caused by Venturia inaequalis and V. pirina respectively, 
correlates with the presence of the phenolic compounds chlorogenic acid, phloridzin, 
arbutin and iso-chlorogenic acid in the outer layers of the fruit. These compounds 
also contribute to the bitter taste of unripe apples and pears and, as the fruit ripens 
and sweetens, it also becomes more susceptible to scab.

Inhibitors released by the plants: The inhibitory substances directly affect micro-
organisms or encourage certain groups to dominate the environment which may 
act as antagonists to pathogen. Example- Tomato leaves secrete exudates which are 
inhibitory to Botrytis cinerea. Resistant varieties of linseed secrete HCN in roots 
which are inhibitory to linseed wilt pathogen, Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lini. Root 
exudates of marigold contain α-terthinyl which is inhibitory to nematodes.
Saponins: it possesses plant glycosides with surfactant (wetting agent) properties. 
Saponins bind sterols in pathogen cell membranes, destroying membrane integrity 
and function. In this way saponins are toxic to organisms containing sterols in 
their membranes (e.g. plants and fungi, but not Oomycota). Inactive saponin 
precursor molecules appear to be stored in vacuoles of intact plant cells, but hydrolase 
enzymes released following wounding or infection convert these precursors to 
active, antimicrobial forms. Several lines of evidence suggest that saponins are 
involved in disease resistance and host range determination. It appears that the 
ability of some pathogens to detoxify specific saponins matches their host range. 

89

For example, a strain of the take-all pathogen that attacks oats as well as wheat and 
barley (Gaeumannomyces graminis var. auenae), releases the enzyme avenacinase. 
Avenacinase detoxifies the triterpenoid saponin, avenacin, found in epidermal cells 
of the roots of oat plants. Mutants in which the gene for avenacinase production has 
been deleted are sensitive to avenacin in vitro and are not pathogenic on oats, but 
remain pathogenic to wheat and barley. Gaeumannomyces graminis var. tritici lacks 
avenacinase and attacks wheat and barley, but not oat species containing avenacin. 
An oat species that does not produce avenacin, Auena Longiglumis, is susceptible to 
Gaeumannomyces graminis var. tritici. Another saponin, tomatine, contributes to the 
resistance of tomato leaves to Botrytis cinerea.

Lectins: Some plant peptides also inhibit the development of fungi, bacteria, viruses 
and insects. They act as proteinase and polygalacturonase-inhibitors, as ribosome 
inhibitors or lectins. These inhibitors interfere with pathogen nutrition and retard 
their development, thus contributing to disease resistance. Because of their similarity 
to peptides called defensins found in insects and mammals, they have been termed 
plant defensins. Secreted defensins provide an important defense against damping-
off pathogens. While only 0.5% of the total protein found in ungerminated radish 
seeds is defensin, it makes up 30% of the proteins released from germinating seeds. 
It provides an antimicrobial micro-environment around the emerging radicle. 
Defensins may constitute up to 10% of the total proteins in cereal, legume and 
solanaceous seeds. Similar studies have shown defensins are also present in the 
outer cell layers of other plant organs such as flowers, leaves and tubers. While many 
defensins accumulate during normal plant development, others are induced, or their 
accumulation is enhanced, after wounding. Defensins, because of their anti-feeding 
activity against insects, provide a defense against insect-transmitted viruses.

Induced biochemical defense mechanism

Phytoalexins: One of the best and extensively-studied defense responses of plants 
to pathogen infection is the induced accumulation of secondary metabolites such as 
phytoalexins (Hammerschmidt, 1999). (Phyton = plant; alexin = to ward off ). Muller 
and Borger first used the term phytoalexins for fungistatic compounds produced by 
plants in response to injury (mechanical or chemical) or infection. Phytoalexins are 
not produced during compatible reaction. Phytoalexins are a diverse group of low 
molecular weight anti-microbial compounds that are synthesized and accumulated 
in appreciable amounts in plants after stimulation by the various types of pathogens, 
by chemical or mechanical injury and are toxic to pathogens (Smith, 1996). In other 
words, phytoalexins are the antibiotics produced by plants that are under attack of 
pathogen. An effective antifungal activity towards plant pathogens is a prime and 

90

necessary characteristic of phytoalexins. They may puncture the cell wall, delay 
maturation, disrupt metabolism or prevent reproduction of the pathogen. Phytoalexins 
are generally the products of plant metabolism which are absent form healthy plant 
tissue or present only in negligible traces, but accumulate in significant amounts in 
response to microbial attack. The biosynthesis of phytoalexins is generally expected to 
proceed de novo, which is from universal elementary building block such as acetate 
or shikimate. At least 100 plant species representing 21 families have been shown 
to accumulate phytoalexins in response to microbial infection and these comprise 
a defense mechanism analogous in some way to the immune response in animals 
(Yoshikawa, 1983; Keen, 1981).

Characteristics of phytoalexins: Fungitoxic and bacteriostatic at low concentrations. 
Produced in host plants in response to stimulus (elicitors) and metabolic products. 
Absent in healthy plants. Remain close to the site of infection. Produced in quantities 
proportionate to the size of inoculum. Produced within 12-14 hours reaching peak 
around 24 hours after inoculation. Host specific rather than pathogen specific.

Phytoalexin
Host
Pisatin 
Pea
Phaseolin 
French bean
Rishitin 
Potato
Cicerin 
Bengal gram
Capsidol 
Pepper
Ipomeamarone 
Sweet potato
Gossipol 
Cotton
Medicarpin 
Alfa alfa
Carrot
Isocoumarin 
Orchinol, Hircinol  Orchid

Pathogen
Monilinia fructicola
Sclerotenia fructigena
Phytopthora infestans
Ascochyta blight
Colletotrichum capsici
Ceratocystis fimbriata
Verticillum alboratum
Helminthosporium
Cerotystis, Fusarium
Rhizoctonia

Phytoalexin detoxification

Both pathogen and plants can degrade, metabolize and sequester phytoalexin (Barz 
et al., 1990; Moesta and Grisebach, 1982). Phytoalexin accumulation, whether 
biotically or abiotically induced, is not signally dependent on the rate of synthesis 
conjugation compartmentalization, release from conjugates, sequestering in wall or 
vacuoles and degradation, but all the factors in totality influence phytoalexin level It 
appears that phytoalexin detoxification is related to virulence in some fungi under 
some conditions. Transfer of pisatin demethylase to a non-pathogen of peas and 
the subsequent limited virulence of the non-pathogen on peas explains the role of 

91

phytoalexins in disease resistance (Matern et al., 1978). The presence of genes for 
detoxification of phytoalexin produced by two hosts of Nectria hematococca, pea and 
chickpea, on dispensable chromosome segments of the fungus and the retention of 
virulence by the fungus in the absence of the genes indicates that phytoalexins are 
not the only determinants of resistance in pea and chickpea.

The prior infection of potato tuber tissue with incompatible race of Phytophthora 
infestans induced resistance to a subsequent challenge by inoculation with a compatible 
race of Phytophthora infestans or tuber infecting Fusarium (Muller, 1958). It was 
hypothesized that the tuber tissue in to the incompatible interaction produced non-
specific substances (phytoalexins) that inhibited further growth of the pathogen 
and also protected the tissue against later infection by other compatible pathogens.

Hypersensitive response (HR): In I902 Harry Marshall Ward, Professor of Botany 
at Cambridge University in England, observed an association between necrotic 
mesophyll cells in Bromus sp. and attempted infection of resistant cultivars by the leaf 
rust fungus, Puccinia recondita. Later E. C. Stakman at the University of Minnesota 
reported similar observations in resistant wheat cultivars infected with the stem 
rust pathogen, P. graminis, and in 1915 he introduced the term hypersensitivity to 
describe this necrotic host reaction. Stakman contended that the more resistant the 
cultivar, the more rapid was the collapse of host cells and the sooner the fungus was 
inactivated. The term hypersensitivity indicates that the host cells are ‘over- (hyper-) 
sensitive’ to the presence of the pathogen. Host cells suicide in the presence of the 
pathogen, preventing further spread of the infection. The most common expression of 
host resistance, and a frequent expression of non-host resistance, is the hypersensitive 
response (HR), a rapid death of cells at the infection site that is associated with 
pathogen limitation as well as with defense gene activation. Some of the avr genes 
that control the HR response to bacterial pathogens in resistant hosts also seem to 
act as pathogenicity (pth) genes in susceptible plants. HR occurs only in incompatible 
host pathogen combinations. HR is initiated by the recognition of specific pathogen 
produced signal molecules known as elicitors.

Once the hypersensitive response has been triggered, plant tissues may become 
highly resistant to a broad range of pathogens for an extended period of time. 
This phenomenon is called systemic acquired resistance (SAR) and represents a 
heightened state of readiness in which plant resources are mobilized in case of 
further attack. Researchers have learned to artificially trigger SAR by spraying plants 
with chemicals called plant activators. These substances are gaining favour in the 
agricultural community because they are much less toxic to humans and wildlife 
than fungicides or antibiotics, and their protective effects can last much longer (Brian 
and Gwyn, 2008). The success of hypersensitive cell death as a resistance mechanism 

92

in individual host-parasite interactions depends on the nutritional requirements 
of the pathogen and on the timing, location and magnitude of the host response 
in relation to pathogen development. In some interactions the rapid suicide of 
challenged host cells undoubtedly restricts pathogen development, contributing to 
the overall defense response.

PR proteins (Pathogenesis Related Proteins): The survival of higher plants is 
dependent upon their ability to adapt to stress. Accordingly, plants have evolved to 
respond to stress by altering their normal patterns of gene expression (Sachs and Ho, 
1986) and physiology. Plant homeostasis is affected by environmental factors such as 
temperature, water, salt, mechanical damage (wounding), chemicals, UV light, and 
the interactions with pathogenic organisms. After pathogenic attack, some plants 
activate the expression of “defense-related” genes (Bowles, 1990). These genes are 
assumed to function in the inhibition of pathogen multiplication and spread. Some 
defense-related genes encode enzyme involved in phenylpropanoiod metabolism 
(Hahlbrock and Scheel, 1989), hydrolytic enzymes (chitinases and B-1, 3-glucanases) 
(Boller, 1987), hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins (cell wall proteins) (Cooper et al., 
1987), and proteinase inhibitors (Ryan, 1988).

Over twenty years ago it was observed that tobacco cultivars resistant to infection 
with tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) accumulated a new set of proteins after infection 
(Van Loon and Van Kammen, 1970). Subsequently, it was established that the 
accumulation of these proteins can also be induced by other pathogens and by the 
exposure to certain chemical agents. The proteins were referred to as “b” proteins or 
“new components”. It was in 1980 when the term “pathogens-related” (PR) protein 
was proposed by (Antoniw et al., 1980) Initial studies of the PRS were performed 
sing native, alkaline polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) system which 
limited the analyses to the acidic isoforms of these proteins. After the localization of 
PRS in the apoplastic spaces of the leaf (Parent and Asselin, 1984), they commonly 
become defined as host encoded, acidic, and extra cellular proteins whose synthesis 
were coordinately induced in pathological or related situations (chemical stress). The 
nomenclature used to identify them was based upon their relative electrophoretic 
mobility in PAGE. PRs have been identified in many dicots and monocots and 
appear to be ubiquitous in higher plants. 

93

Tobacco PR-1a

Tobacco PR-2

Tobacco P, O

Tobacco R

PR-5

Tobacco S

PR-1

PR-2

PR-3

PR-4

PR-6

PR-7

PR-8

PR-9

Recognized and proposed families of pathogenesis-related proteins (Van Loon and Van Strien, 
1999)

Family Type member

Properties

Antifungal. 14-27kD

Class I, II and III endo-beta-1,3 glucanases, 25-35kD

Class I, II, IV, V, VI and VII endochitinases, about 30kD

Antifungal, win-like proteins, endochitinase activity similar 
to prohevein C-terminal domain, 13-19kD

Antifungal, thaumatin-like proteins, osmotins zeamatins, 
permeatins, similar to alpha-amaylase/trypsin inhibitors.

Tomato inhibitor I

Protease inhibitors, 6-13kD

Tomato P69

Endoproteases

Cucumber chitinase

Class III chitinases, chitinase/lysozyme

Lignin-forming peroxidase Peroxidases, peroxidase- like proteins

PR-10

Parsley PR-1

Ribonucleases, bet v 1-related proteins

PR-11

Tobacco class V chitinase

Endochitinase activity

PR-12

Radish Ps- AFP3

Plant defensins

PR-13 Arabidopsis THI2, 1

Thionins

PR-14

Barley LTP4

Non-specific lipid transfer proteins (ns-LTPs)

PR-15

Barley OxOa (germin)

Oxalate oxidase

PR-16

Barley OxOLP

Oxalate-oxidase like proteins

PR-17

Tobacco PRp27

Unknown 

Characteristics of PRs protein: PRs are distinguished by specific biochemical and 
structural characteristic. They are low-molecular proteins (6-43 kDa), extractable 
and stable at low pH (thermostable, and highly resistant to proteases. PRs have dual 
cellular localization - vacuolar and apoplastic, the apoplast being the main site of 
their accumulation (Van Loon, 1999). Apart from being present in the primary and 
secondary cell walls of infected plants, PRS are also found in cell wall appositions 
(papillae) deposited at the inner side of cell wall in response to fungal attack ( Jeun, 
2000). Sometimes they are also detected in the cell walls of invading fungal pathogens 
and in the space formed between cell walls and invaginated plasma membrane of 
fungi. Acidic and basic PRs have been identified, each of these counterparts with 
both apoplastic and vacuolar localization (Buchel and Linthorst, 1999). Earlier 
studies have shown that acidic tobacco PR-1 are localized in the apoplast, whereas, 
basic tobacco PR-1 accumulate in the vacuole (Bol et al., 1990). 

PRs are established in all plant organs like leaves, stem, root and flowers. In the 
leaves, where they can amount to 5-10% of total leaf protein. In the leaves PRS are 
present in mesophyll and epidermal tissues. They are also localized in the abscission 

94

zone of leaves and inflorescence, abscission zone at the stem-petiole junction, and 
vascular tissue of stems and petioles (Eyal et al., 1993; Del Campillo and Lewis, 1992). 
In inflorescences PRS are detected in sepals, pedicels, anthers, pistils, stigmata and 
ovaries (Van Loon, 1999; Buchel and Linthorst, 1999). In seeds of maize, sorghum, 
oat, barley, and wheat a group of PRS is established, commonly named permatins, 
characterized as PR-5 thaumatin-like proteins (Vigers et al., 1991). Linusitin from 
flax seeds is referred to the same group (Anlovar et al., 1998).

Plantibodies: Transgenic plants have been produced which are genetically engineered 
to incorporate into their genome, and to express foreign genes. It shown in transgenic 
plant. Ex:- Artichoke mottled crinkle virus.

ROS Burst: ROS are a group of free radicals, reactive molecules, and ions that are 
derived from O2. It has been estimated that about 1% of O2 consumed by plants is 
diverted to produce ROS. ROS are produced in various sub-cellular compartments 
such as plasma membrane, cell wall, mitochondria, chloroplasts and peroxisomes. 
where the large number of ROS are produced during the pathogen attack. ROS 
are well recognized for playing a dual role as both deleterious and beneficial species 
depending on their concentration in plants. At high concentration ROS cause 
damage to biomolecules, whereas at low/moderate concentration it acts as second 
messenger in intracellular signaling cascades that mediate several responses in plant 
cells, including stomatal closure, programmed cell death and acquisition of tolerance 
to both biotic and abiotic stresses. ROS include singlet oxygen (O2), superoxide 
anion (O2) hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and hydroxyl radicals (OH). Hydrogen 
peroxide is most stable.

Conclusion

The first line of defense against the infection is the surface of the host. Since one 
major goal is to improve disease resistance in economically useful plants, insertion 
of genes encoding PR proteins, phytoalexin and other antimicrobial substances 
enhancing their level of expression is the method of choice. Recent advanced in 
molecular and analytical sciences have provided a much better view of the defense 
mechanism of plant against the pathogen attack. Further, studies on these strategies 
will continue to provide new insights into new approaches for disease management. 

References

Anlover, S., Serra, M. D., Dermastia, M. and Menestrina, G. (1998). Membrane 
permeabilizing activity of pathogenesis-related protein lunasitin from flax seed. 
Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact, 11: 610-617.

Antoniw, J. F., Ritter, C. E., Pierpoint, W. S. and Van Loon, L. C. (1980). Comparison 

95

of three pathogenesis related proteins from plants of two cultivars of tobacco 
infected with TMV. J. Gen. Virol., 47: 79-87.

Barz, W., Bless, W., Berger, F., Gunia W. and Mackenbrock, U. (1990). Phytoalexins 
as the part of induced defense reactions in plants their elicitation function and 
metabolism. In Bioactive compounds from plants, PP. 140-56. Ciba Found 
Symp., 154. New York Wiley.

Bol, J. F., Linthorst, H. J. M. and Cornelissen, B. J. C. (1990). Plant pathogenesis-
related proteins induced by virus infection. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol., 28: 113-138.

Boller, T. (1987). Hydrolytic enzymes in plant disease resistance. In: Kosuge T, Nester 
E. W. (eds) Plant microbe interactions, molecular and general aspects, Vol 2 
Macmillan, New York, pp: 385-413.

Bowles, D. J. (1990). Defense related proteins in higher plants. Annu. Rev. Biochem., 

59:873-907. 

Brian, C. F. and Gwyn, A. B. (2008). An overview of plant defense against pathogens 
and herbivores. The Plant Health Instructor. DOI: 10.1094/PHI-I-2008-0226-01

Buchel, A. S. and Linthorst, H. J. M. (1999). PR-1: A group of plant proteins induced 
upon pathogen infection. In: pathogenesis-related proteins in plants (eds) S. 
K. Datta and S. Muthukrishnan, CRC Press LLC, Boca Raton, pp: 21-47.

Cooper, J. B., Chen, J. A., Van Holst, G. J. and Varner, J. E. (1987). Hydroxyproline 

rich glycoproteins of plant cell walls. Trends Biochem., Sci., 12: 24-27.

David Guest and John Brown (1997). Plant pathogens and plant diseases. Rockvale 
publications national library of Australia ISBN 1-86389-439. Page 263-260. 
Edited by Brown, J. F. and Ogle, H. J.

Del Campillo, E. and Lewis, L. N. (1992). Identification and kinetics of accumulation 
of proteins induced by ethylene in bean abscission zone. Plant Physiol., 98: 
955-961.

Eyal, Y., Meller, Y., Lev Yadun, S. and Fluhr, R. (1993). A basic-type PR-1 promoter 
directs ethylene responsiveness, vascular and abscission zones specific expression. 
Plant J., 4: 225-234.

Hahlbrock, K. and Scheel, D. (1989). Physiological and molecular biology of 
phenypropanoid metabolism. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Bio., 40:347-
369.

Hammerschmidt, R. (1999). Phytoalexins: What have we learned after 60 years. 

Annual Review of Phytopathology, 37: 285-305.

96

 Jeun, Y. Ch. (2000). Immunolocalization of PR-protein P14 in leaves of tomato 
plant exhibiting systemic acquired resistance against Phytophthora infestans 
induced by pretreatment with 3-aminobutyric acid and preinoculation with 
TNV. J. Plant Dis. Prot., 107: 352-367.

Keen, N. T. (1981). Evaluation of the role of phytoalexins. In RC Staples, ed, Plant.

Matern, U., Strobel, G. and Shepard, J. (1978). Reactions of phytoalexins in a potato 
population derived from mesophyle protoplasts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.,75: 4935-
4939.

Moesta, P. and Grisebach, H. (1982). 1-2 Aminqoxy-3-phenyipropionic acid inhibits 
phytoalexins accumulation in soybean with concomitant loss of resistance 
against Phytophthora megasperma f. sp. Glycinea. Physiol. Plant Pathol., 21: 65-70. 

Muller, K. O. (1958). Studies on phytoalexins: 1. The formation and immunological 
significance of phytoalexins production by Phaseolus valgaris in response to 
infection with Sclerotinia fruticola and Phytophthora infestans. Acest. J. Biol. Sci., 
11: 275-300.

 Parent, J. G. and Asselin, A. (1984). Detection of pathogenesis related (PR or b) 
and of other proteins in the intercellular fluid of hypersensitive plants infected 
with tobacco mosaic virus. Can. J. Bot., 62:564-569.

Rayan, C. A. (1988). Proteinase inhibitor gene families: tissue specificity and regulation. 
In Verma, D. P. S. and Goldeberg, R. B. (eds). Temporal and spatial regulation 
of plant genes. Springer, Wein New York, pp: 223-233.

Sach, M. and Ho, T. H. D. (1986). Alternation of gene expression during environmental 

stress in plants. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol., 37: 363-376.

Smith, C. J. (1996). Accumulation of phytoalexins: Defense mechanism and stimulus 

response system. New Phytologist., 132: 1-45.

Tom Schultz, (2007). Jim cooper, Master Gardener WSU County Extension, SJC 

© June 5, 2007

Van Loon, L. C. (1999). Occurrence and properties of plant pathogenesis-related 
proteins. In: pathogenesis-related protein in plants (eds) S. K. Datta and S. 
Muthukrishnan, CRC Press LLC, Boca Raton, pp: 1-19.

Van Loon, L. C. and Van Kammen, A. (1970). Polyacrylamide disc electrophoresis 
of the soluble leaf proteins from Nicotiana tabacum var. “Samsun and Samsun 
NN” II. Changes in protein constitution after infection with tobacco mosaic 
virus. Virology, 40: 199-211.

Van Loon, L. C. and Van Strien, E. A. (1999). The families of pathogenesis-related 

97

proteins, their activities and comparative analysis of PR-1 type proteins. Physiol. 
Mol. Plant Pathol., 55: 85-97.

Vigers, A. J., Roberts, W. K. and Sellitrennikoff, C. P. (1991). A new family of plant 

antifungal proteins. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact, 4: 315-323.

Yoshikawa, M. (1983). Isolation and biological activity of glycinol a pterocarpan 

phytoalexin synthesized by soybeans. Plant Physiol., 68: 358-368.

98

8

 Advancements in 

Detecting Plant Diseases

Parmar Krishna Atulbhai

Ph.D. Scholar, N. M. College of Agriculture, 
Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari - 396450, Gujarat

Abstract

Plant diseases have a significant impact on agricultural yield, leading to substantial 
losses. To ensure the food security of rising global population, there is a pressing 
need to boost production and productivity. Consequently, early detection becomes 
crucial in formulating effective disease management strategies. Advancements in 
techniques have led to a revolutionary transformation in the field of detection and 
diagnosis. Traditional visual inspection has given way to the adoption of advanced 
techniques such as advanced imaging, spectrometry, biosensors, immunological and 
molecular techniques. These innovative approaches offer more efficient, objective, and 
accurate means of identifying and managing plant diseases, ultimately contributing 
to sustainable agriculture, increased crop yields, and global food security. 

Keywords: Disease, Detection, Biosensor, Spectroscopy, PCR, ELISA, Molecular, 
Serology

Introduction

Plant health is susceptible to numerous living factors, including pathogens, insect 
pests, weeds, human activities, as well as non-living factors like temperature, humidity, 
pH, and pollution. Pathogens, in particular, have a significant influence on the 
degradation of both the quality and quantity of plants. With the growing population, 
augmenting agricultural production and productivity has become crucial, and plant 
diseases represent a significant factor contributing to yield losses in agriculture. 

99

To develop an effective disease management strategy, it is essential to prioritize 
understanding the factors responsible for causing the disease.

Plant disease detection and diagnosis involve the identification of pathogens, 
pests, or environmental factors that cause abnormalities in plant growth, yield, or 
overall health. These abnormalities may manifest as visible symptoms such as leaf 
discoloration, wilting, lesions, or deformities. However, symptoms alone may not 
provide conclusive evidence of the underlying cause, as different pathogens or stress 
factors can result in similar symptoms.

Traditional methods of disease detection and diagnosis have often relied on 
visual inspection by experienced agronomists or laboratory analysis, which can 
be time-consuming and subjective. To overcome these challenges, researchers 
and technologists have turned to innovative methods such as advanced imaging, 
molecular techniques, and artificial intelligence. These innovative approaches offer 
heightened efficiency, objectivity, and precision when it comes to the identification 
and management of plant diseases. In this chapter, we will explore various techniques 
for detecting and diagnosing different types of plant diseases.

The disease detection techniques are categorized into Indirect and Direct 

methods: 

Indirect Methods

 » Do not depend on direct identification of the presence of pathogen
 » Detect the physiological and metabolic changes in plant due to infection
 » Non-destructive and non-invasive method

e.g., Stress based detection techniques i.e., Imaging techniques and Bio-senser based 
detection techniques (Ray et al., 2017)

Imaging Techniques for Plant Disease Detection

Plant disease detection using image processing techniques has gained significant 
attention in recent years due to its potential for early and accurate detection, which 
can help in timely disease management and crop protection. 

These techniques can capture detailed information about plant tissues at 
different wavelengths or temperatures, enabling the identification of disease-
specific patterns, detection of subtle changes in plant physiology and metabolism 
associated with diseases. Imaging techniques provide spatial information, enabling 
the identification of localized disease patterns across plant surfaces. The process of 
detecting plant diseases begins with acquiring images, followed by preprocessing 

100

and segmentation. This is then complemented by various techniques for feature 
extraction and classification (Singh et al. 2020).

In order to identify various plant diseases, imaging systems utilize sensors 
to gather data for studying leaves from different perspectives. A range of valuable 
imaging techniques are employed for this purpose, including thermal imaging, 
multispectral imaging, fluorescence imaging, hyperspectral imaging, visible imaging, 
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

1.  Thermography:

It is also called as thermal imaging. The principle behind the technique involves use 
of infrared radiation to capture and analyze temperature distribution on the surface 
of the plant. As in case of plant disease infection, diseased tissues exhibit different 
patterns of temperature as compared to healthy tissues.

The advantages of this technique are non-invasiveness and ability of detection 
prior to visible symptoms development. As environmental conditions affect physiology 
of plants calibration is required to get accurate result (Mahlein, 2016).

2. 

 Tomography:

It is an imaging technique which captures multiple imaging measurements from 
different angles around the plant and combines them to construct 3D representation 
of the plant’s internal features through which it provides visualization and analysis 
of internal structures of plants. 

The technique enables non-destructive examination, early detection, monitoring 
and characterization of plant. It may vary with target plant species and target plant 
disease. 

3.  Multispectral imaging:

It captures multiple images of plant at different wavelengths across the electromagnetic 
spectrum. The wavelengths are selected on the basis of the sensitivity of the plant and 
disease to the different parts of electromagnetic spectrum. By analysis and comparison 
of the characteristic spectral information associated with both healthy and diseased 
plant from the different bands, abnormalities, physiological changes or presence of 
the disease detected. Similarly, this technique also provides non-destructive, non-
invasive and early disease detection result (Mahlein et al, 2012).
4.  Hyperspectral imaging:

As healthy and diseased plants exhibit different spectral signatures, these spectral 
signatures correspond to the unique way in which different plant tissues and pigments 
interact with light. By analyzing the spectral information of plants, hyperspectral 

101

imaging can detect subtle changes in their reflectance patterns, which can indicate 
the presence of diseases or stress conditions. This technique also gives non-destructive 
and non-invasive disease detection.

5.  Fluorescent imaging:

It is widely used technique and proves highly beneficial for crop monitoring as it 
enables the early detection and mitigation of stress, leading to significant reductions 
in yield losses. It measures and analyze fluorescence emitted by plants when exposed 
to specific wavelengths of light. The resulting fluorescence induction curve provides 
valuable information about the plant’s photosynthetic performance and physiological 
status. Changes in the shape, amplitude, and kinetics of the fluorescence induction 
curve can indicate the presence of stress or disease in plants.

The technique offers several advantages in plant disease detection, including 
high sensitivity, specificity, and the ability to visualize and quantify disease-related 
processes at the cellular and molecular levels.

Spectroscopic Techniques for Plant Disease Detection

Spectroscopy involves the study of the interaction between electromagnetic radiation 
(e.g., light) and matter (such as plant tissues). It measures how different wavelengths 
of light are absorbed, emitted, or scattered by the sample. Spectroscopic techniques 
provide valuable data about the chemical composition, molecular structures, and 
other characteristics of the substances being analyzed. 

One prominent spectroscopic technique widely used in plant disease detection is 
Hyperspectral Imaging. This approach captures a spectrum for each pixel in an image, 
providing detailed information about the plant’s biochemical and physiological status.

Another valuable spectroscopic method is Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) 
Spectroscopy. It analyzes the infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum to 
identify molecular vibrations in plant tissues. FTIR has been used effectively to 
detect diseases like tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) and wheat leaf rust.

Bio-Sensers for Plant Disease Detection

A biosensor is a device that combines a biological sensing element (such as enzymes, 
antibodies, or nucleic acids) with a transducer to detect and convert a biological 
response into a measurable signal. The generated signal is then transduced into an 
electrical, optical or chemical output, which can be measured and quantified. The 
sensing element of a biosensor interacts with a specific analyte, such as a protein, 
antigen, antibody, enzyme, or nucleic acid, resulting in a biochemical reaction.

 Biosensors have proven to be valuable tools in plant disease detection and 

102

monitoring. They offer several advantages, including rapid and sensitive detection, 
real-time monitoring, and the potential for on-site or in-field applications.

1.  Optical biosensor:

Optical biosensors have been employed in plant disease detection due to their 
sensitivity, versatility, and ability to provide real-time monitoring. The principle 
behind optical biosensors for plant disease detection involves the interaction between 
a biological recognition element (e.g., antibodies, aptamers, or enzymes) and the 
target biomolecule (e.g., pathogen, toxin, or specific biomarker) of interest. This 
interaction results in a change in the optical properties of the sensing element, which 
is then translated into a measurable signal.

There are different optical transduction methods used in optical biosensors, and 

two common ones are fluorescence and surface plasmon resonance (SPR).

a.  Fluorescence-based optical biosensors

The sensing element is typically labeled with a fluorescent molecule which on binding 
with target molecule emits fluorescence. These changes in fluorescence are detected 
and quantified using a fluorescence detector.

b.  Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR)-based optical biosensors

SPR occurs when polarized light interacts with a thin metal film (usually gold) on a 
sensor surface. When light strikes the metal surface, it induces a collective oscillation 
of electrons known as a surface plasmon. The angle at which this resonance occurs 
is highly sensitive to changes in the refractive index near the sensor surface. The 
sensing element is immobilized on the metal surface, and when the target biomolecule 
binds to the sensing element, it causes a change in the refractive index at the sensor 
surface. This change in refractive index results in a shift in the angle of SPR, which 
is detected and measured.

2.  Volatile biosensor:

The principle of volatile biosensors in plant disease detection is based on the specific 
and selective recognition of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) emitted by plants in 
response to disease or stress conditions. The sensing element of the volatile biosensor 
is designed to have high affinity and specificity for the target VOCs. When the 
target VOCs are present in the air or headspace around the plant, they bind to the 
biological sensing element on the biosensor’s surface and on binding it results in a 
biochemical reaction.

 The biochemical reaction leads to change in properties of biosensor that 
generates a measurable signal that is proportional to the concentration of the 

103

target VOCs in the plant sample. The signal is then converted and amplified by 
the biosensor’s transducer. By comparing the VOC profile of the plant sample with 
known profiles from healthy and diseased plants, we can identify the presence of 
specific VOCs associated with the disease, which serves as an indicator for disease 
detection and monitoring.

Direct Methods: 

Involves direct detection of the presence of the pathogen

 »
 » Destructive and invasive method
 » Allows identification of non-culturable pathogens 
e.g., Molecular based detection methods and Immunological based detection 

methods (Ray et al., 2017)

Molecular Techniques for Plant Disease Detection:

Another promising avenue for plant disease detection and diagnosis is the application 
of molecular techniques, including DNA-based methods. Polymerase Chain Reaction 
(PCR) and other DNA amplification techniques which can detect the presence of 
specific pathogens by amplifying their genetic material in plant samples. 

1.  Polymerase chain reaction: 

It is the most powerful primer mediated technique which allows amplification 
and detection of specific DNA sequences associated with plant pathogens. The 
principle behind the technique is the ability of polymerase enzyme to synthesize new 
complementary strand of targeted DNA strand. The technique has been used since many 
years in detection and diagnosis of plant disease due to high sensitivity and accuracy.

Various methods can be used to detect the amplified PCR products. Gel 
electrophoresis is a common technique, where the amplified DNA fragments 
are separated based on size and visualized using DNA-staining dyes. Due to this 
drawback, more advanced PCR techniques, such as real-time PCR (qPCR), Nested 
PCR, Multiplex PCR, RT-PCR are used to eliminate post PCR steps.

i.  Real time PCR

It is also called as Q-PCR or Quantitative PCR which monitors the amplification 
of DNA in real-time using fluorescent probes. A technique in which fluoro-probes, 
bind to specific target regions of amplicons and produce fluorescence during PCR. 
Thus, it enables quantitative detection and real-time monitoring of the amplification 
process. As it provides accurate quantification of the PCR cycles, it saves the time 
for post PCR procedures.

104

ii.  Nested PCR

Nested PCR is a method that involves amplifying a specific target DNA region in 
two successive rounds using two different sets of primers. In the first round, a larger 
region of DNA is amplified, and in the second round, a smaller, internal region 
within the first PCR product is further amplified. Nested PCR sensitivity is 1000 
times greater than single PCR for pathogen identification (Yeo and Wong, 2002). 
It is Used to increase the sensitivity and/or specificity of pathogen detection.

iii.  Multiplex PCR

iv.  RT-PCR

Multiplex PCR is based on the simultaneous amplification of multiple target DNA 
sequences using multiple sets of primers in a single reaction. It saves time and cost 
of the process for separate samples.

The technique is based on conversion of RNA into complementary DNA (cDNA) 
using reverse transcriptase, followed by amplification of the cDNA using PCR, 
enabling the detection and quantification of RNA targets.

2.  Probe base method:

i.  Northern blotting

Northern blot, which is also known as the RNA blot. In plant disease detection, 
Northern blotting is used to study gene expression patterns and identify changes 
in RNA levels that may be associated with specific diseases or stress conditions. It 
involves the detection and analysis of RNA molecules by separating them based on 
size through gel electrophoresis, transferring them onto a membrane, and probing 
with specific labeled DNA or RNA probes. This probe is typically labeled with a 
radioactive or fluorescent tag, which helps to detect plant diseases. It is a powerful 
tool for understanding the molecular basis of plant diseases and provides valuable 
information about the regulation of gene expression during infection or stress.

ii.  In Situ Hybridization

It involves the localization and detection of specific nucleic acid sequences within 
cells or tissues by hybridizing them with labeled DNA or RNA probes, allowing for 
spatial visualization of gene expression or genetic elements. This technique allows 
researchers to identify the presence and abundance of target RNA sequences, such as 
messenger RNA (mRNA) or viral RNA, directly in the context of the plant tissue. In 
situ hybridization can be particularly valuable for understanding the molecular basis 
of plant diseases and studying the interaction between pathogens and host plants.

105

3.  Microarray:

The principle of microarray technology involves the simultaneous detection and 
quantification of thousands of specific RNA molecules (mRNA) or DNA sequences 
in a single experiment. Microarrays consist of thousands of small DNA or RNA 
probes that are complementary to specific target genes or RNA sequences of 
interest. The cDNA samples of the target DNA are labeled with fluorescent dyes or 
other detectable tags, and each labeled sample is hybridized to the microarray slide 
containing the specific probes. After hybridization, the microarray slide is scanned 
to detect the fluorescence signals generated by the bound cDNA. The intensity of 
the fluorescence at each spot on the microarray corresponds to the expression level 
of the corresponding gene in the sample.

4.  LAMP: Loop Mediated Isothermal Amplification

LAMP is an isothermal nucleic acid amplification technique. The technique of 
isothermal amplification involves the amplification of DNA or RNA sequences 
under constant temperature conditions, eliminating the need for thermal cycling, and 
enabling rapid and efficient nucleic acid amplification. The principle of LAMP relies 
on the use of multiple primers and a DNA polymerase with strand displacement 
activity to amplify the target DNA under isothermal conditions. The amplification 
products are stem-loop DNA structures with several inverted repeats of the target 
and cauliflower-like structures with multiple loops. The presence of amplified DNA 
can be detected using various methods, such as visual observation of turbidity or by 
adding fluorescent dyes that bind to double-stranded DNA.

Immunological Techniques for Plant Disease Detection

When the body or a plant is exposed to foreign substances, such as antigens, a 
response is triggered, leading to the production of specific protein molecules known 
as antibodies. Serological detection techniques operate based on the principle of 
utilizing the specificity of antibodies or antigens. It employs the binding between 
antibodies and antigens to detect and measure the presence of specific pathogens in a 
sample. There are various serological techniques developed such as Immunodiffusion 
test, ELISA (enzyme linked immunosorbent assay), DIBA (dot immunobinding 
assay), TBIA (tissue blot immunoassay), Immunosorbent electron microscopy and 
Flow cytometry.

1.  Immunodiffusion test

The immuno-diffusion test, also known as the agar gel immunodiffusion (AGID) 
test, is a simple and widely used serological technique for detecting the presence 
of specific antibodies or antigens in a sample. The immuno-diffusion test is based 

106

on the principle of antigen-antibody interactions and their ability to form visible 
precipitin lines when allowed to diffuse through an agar gel medium.

If the antigen and antibody are specific to each other (i.e., they react due to the 
presence of the target pathogen or plant-specific antigens), they will form immune 
complexes by combining in the gel medium. As the immune complexes diffuse 
outward from their respective wells, they meet and form visible precipitin lines 
where the antigen and antibody react. The appearance of precipitin lines indicates 
a positive reaction, suggesting the presence of the target pathogen or plant-specific 
antibodies in the sample.

2.  ELISA (Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay)

ELISA is a powerful tool for rapid and sensitive detection of plant pathogens, 
and it is commonly employed in both research and agricultural settings for disease 
diagnosis and monitoring. It is based on the principle of specific antigen-antibody 
interactions, allowing the detection and quantification of target pathogens or plant-
specific antigens in plant samples. In ELISA, two antibodies are used: primary and 
secondary. Primary antibody is coated to the microtiter plate whereas secondary 
antibody is used as detection antibody which is labelled with enzymes. This enzyme 
on attachment to the antigen-antibody complex, produces signal. The intensity of 
the signal is measured which is directly proportional to the amount of target antigen 
or antibody present in the sample.

3.  DIBA (Dot immunobinding assay)

Dot immunobinding assay is a simplified and rapid immunological technique used 
to detect the presence of specific antigens or antibodies in a sample. The principle 
of Dot-IBA is similar to other immunobinding assays, such as the Enzyme-Linked 
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) but it involves the application of the sample as small 
dots on a solid support, such as a nitrocellulose or PVDF membrane.

4.  TBIA (Tissue blot immunoassay)

The Tissue Blot Immunobinding Assay (TBIA) is a serological technique used in 
plant disease detection to identify the presence and distribution of specific pathogens, 
such as viruses or bacteria, in plant tissues. TBIA allows researchers to visualize 
the spatial distribution of the pathogen within the plant, which can aid in disease 
diagnosis and monitoring. By visualizing the spatial distribution of the pathogen in 
the plant, TBIA can help differentiate localized infections from systemic ones and 
identify the extent of disease spread.

5.  Immunosorbent Electron Microscopy

Immunosorbent Electron Microscopy is a combination of immunological techniques 

107

and electron microscopy. It involves the use of antibodies or antigens conjugated 
with electron-dense markers (such as gold particles) to visualize specific interactions 
between antigens and antibodies at the ultrastructural level. Immunosorbent Electron 
Microscopy (ISEM) is a highly specialized technique that provides detailed information 
about the ultrastructural localization of specific antigens or pathogens within plant 
tissues. It can be valuable for studying the interactions between pathogens and host 
plants, understanding disease mechanisms, and characterizing disease symptoms at 
the cellular and subcellular levels.

6.  Flow cytometry

Flow cytometry is a powerful analytical technique used in plant disease detection 
and research to analyze and quantify various characteristics of individual plant cells 
or particles in a liquid suspension. The principle of flow cytometry involves the 
passage of individual plant cells or particles through a flow cell in a liquid stream. 
As the cells pass through the flow cell, they are exposed to a laser beam, and the 
light scattered or emitted by the cells is measured. Additionally, fluorescent markers 
or dyes can be used to label specific cellular components, such as DNA, proteins, 
or organelles, enabling the detection of specific features or molecules within the 
cells. The light scattered by the cells and the emitted fluorescence are detected by 
photodetectors. It allows for the rapid and simultaneous measurement of multiple 
parameters, providing valuable information about the physiological and pathological 
changes occurring in plant cells during disease development.

Conclusion

In conclusion, plant disease detection techniques play a crucial role in safeguarding 
agricultural productivity and ensuring food security. Over the years, various advanced 
and innovative methods have been developed to accurately and rapidly identify 
pathogens, assess disease severity, and monitor plant health. These techniques include 
serological assays like ELISA and immunoblotting, molecular methods like PCR 
and LAMP, imaging-based approaches like hyperspectral imaging.

The diversity of these techniques allows researchers, plant pathologists, and 
farmers to choose the most appropriate approach for their specific needs, considering 
factors such as sensitivity, specificity, cost, and ease of use. Combining multiple 
approaches can enhance disease detection accuracy and provide comprehensive 
insights into plant-pathogen interactions. 

As technology continues to advance, we can expect further improvements and 
innovations in plant disease detection. These include the integration of artificial 
intelligence, machine learning, and bioinformatics to enhance data analysis and 

108

References

interpretation, the utilization of portable and field-deployable devices for on-site 
diagnostics, and the continuous improvement of high-throughput sequencing 
technologies for comprehensive pathogen profiling.

Das, A., and Mohanta, R. (2017). Image processing techniques for disease spot 
detection on plant leaves: A survey. International Journal of Computer Science 
and Information Security, 15(6):109-114.

Ghosal, S., Blystone, D., Singh, A. K., Ganapathysubramanian, B., Singh, A. and 
Sarkar, S. (2018). An explainable deep machine vision framework for plant stress 
phenotyping. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(18):4613-4618.

Haralick, R. M., Shanmugam, K. and Dinstein, I. (1973). Textural features for image 
classification. IEEE Transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics, (6):610-621.

Mahlein, A. K., Steiner, U., Hillnhütter, C., Dehne, H. W., & Oerke, E. C. (2012). 
Hyperspectral imaging for small-scale analysis of symptoms caused by different 
sugar beet diseases. Plant Methods, 8(1):3.

Mahlein, A. K. (2016). Plant disease detection by imaging sensors – parallels and 
specific demands for precision agriculture and plant phenotyping. Plant Disease, 
100(2), 241-251.

Nanni, L., Ghidoni, S. and Brahnam, S. (2018). A survey on image fusion applications 

in agriculture. Information Fusion, 43:42-54.

Ray, M., Ray, A., Dash, S., Mishra, A., Achary, K. G., Nayak, S. and Singh, S. (2017). 
Fungal disease detection in plants: Traditional assays, novel diagnostic techniques 
and biosensors. Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 87:708–723.

Sladojevic, S., Arsenovic, M., Anderla, A. and Culibrk, D. (2016). Deep neural 
networks-based recognition of plant diseases by leaf image classification. 
Computational intelligence and neuroscience, 2016.

Singh, V., Sharma. N and Singh. S. (2021). A review of imaging techniques for plant 

disease detection. Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture, 5:301-302.

Yeo, S. F. and Wong, B. (2002). Current Status of Nonculture Methods for Diagnosis 
of Invasive Fungal Infections. Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 15(3):465– 484.

109

Technology for Mass Production 

of Trichoderma spp.

9

C. M. Bhaliya1, H. A. Shekhada2, R. L. Joshi3 and J. J. Padsala4
1Assistant Research Scientist, Department of Plant Pathology,  College of Agriculture,                             
Junagadh Agricultural University, ( Junagadh) - 362 001
2Ph.D. Scholar, Department of Plant Pathology, College of Agriculture, Junagadh 
Agricultural University, ( Junagadh) 362 001
3Ph.D. Scholar, Navsari Agricultural University, (Navsari) 369450
4Ph.D. Scholar, Navsari Agricultural University, (Navsari) 369450

Abstract

Trichoderma spp. have emerged as potent biocontrol agents and plant growth promoters 
with immense potential for sustainable agriculture and disease management. The mass 
production of these beneficial fungi is essential to meet the increasing demand for 
their application in modern farming practices. The mass production of Trichoderma 
is commonly achieved through solid and liquid state fermentation methods. While 
solid fermentation can be expensive due to substrate requirements, liquid fermentation 
using cost-effective media like molasses and yeast medium is the preferred approach in 
commercial production. Trichoderma formulations are available in various forms, such 
as dusts, granules, pellets, and wettable powders. These formulations are directly applied 
to the soil in nurseries and main fields to prevent soil-borne pathogen inoculum. Seed 
dressing with Trichoderma formulations through dry seed treatment or seed biopriming 
is an effective strategy to protect seeds from soil-borne diseases during germination. 
In field conditions, adding Trichoderma-enriched farmyard manure (FYM) directly to 
the soil has proven to be an efficient method for disease management in both nurseries 
and fields. Granular or pellet preparations of Trichoderma are also viable options for 
application. To ensure the safety and efficacy of Trichoderma products, thorough 
testing and quality control measures are essential. Ensuring these products do not 

110

harm humans, the environment, or other living organisms is critical. Strict quality 
standards must be maintained to prevent the sale of poor-quality goods to farmers. 
Ensuring the safety and quality of Trichoderma products is paramount for successful 
disease control and sustainable agriculture. 

Keywords: Trichoderma, mass multiplication, formulation, seed dressing, soil borne.

Introduction

The green revolution brought about a significant increase in agricultural productivity 
through the extensive use of chemical fertilizers and insecticides. However, the long-
term and widespread application of chemical biocides to combat various organisms, 
including weeds, fungi, and insects, has raised concerns regarding their potential 
impact on human health and the environment. As a result, there is a global push 
to minimize the use of chemical pesticides, paving the way for the development of 
sustainable crop protection techniques.

Biological  control  using  microorganisms  has  emerged  as  a  natural  and 
environmentally  acceptable  alternative  to  chemical  treatments.  Among  these 
microorganisms, Trichoderma, an antagonistic fungus found in soil and root ecosystems, 
stands out as a potent biocontrol agent. Trichoderma species have been known to 
protect crops from a wide range of soil and seed-borne diseases, making it particularly 
effective in various agricultural settings.

The diverse species of Trichoderma, such as T. virens, T. viride, T. koningii, T. 
polysporum, T. hamatum, T. longibrachiatum, T. asperellum, and T. harzianum are 
widely utilized for controlling plant diseases. Trichoderma employs various regulatory 
mechanisms to combat phytopathogens, including competition, mycoparasitism, 
antibiosis, synthesis of lytic enzymes, and release of secondary metabolites. Moreover, 
it promotes plant growth and development, enhances nutrient uptake, and boosts 
stress tolerance (Woo et al., 2014). It has high rates of sporulation and recombination, 
as well as high levels of competitiveness and saprophytic survival. (Howell, 2013). 
Its different strains grow rapidly when inoculated in the soil, since they are naturally 
resistant to many toxic compounds, including herbicides, fungicides and pesticides 
(Seethapathy et al., 2017).

Mass production of Trichoderma has become a significant area of research in 
search of alternatives to chemical pesticides and fertilizers (Parkash and Saikia, 
2015). Trichoderma’s ability to resist toxic compounds, including herbicides and 
fungicides, makes it an appealing choice for commercial usage. However, high costs 
associated with traditional synthetic media used for production limit its widespread 
commercial adoption (Subash et al., 2013). The research is focused on finding cost-

111

effective alternatives for Trichoderma mass production, exploring substrates like home 
waste, vegetable waste, and other biodegradable materials. Successful formulations 
must meet specific criteria, such as low application dose, long shelf life, ease of use, 
contaminant-free composition, and economic viability for commercial profitability 
(Babu and Pallavi, 2013).

The efficient formulation and delivery mechanisms for bioagents are crucial for 
implementing biological control through microbial antagonists. The commercially 
available Trichoderma formulations are used to manage various plant diseases, but 
there is a need for multiplying Trichoderma spp. on biodegradable substrates with 
extended shelf life for commercial-scale usage.

The search for sustainable alternatives to chemical pesticides has highlighted 
the potential of Trichoderma spp. as a highly effective biocontrol agent for managing 
plant diseases and promoting crop growth. The challenge lies in developing cost-
effective mass production technologies and viable formulations for its commercial 
utilization. By addressing these challenges, Trichoderma-based biocontrol can 
contribute significantly to sustainable agriculture and reduce the environmental 
impact of traditional chemical-intensive practices.

Mode of action 

The success of any bioagents is depends on their high reproductive capacity, capacity 
to survive in harsh conditions, efficiency in nutrient utilization, capacity to modify 
the rhizosphere, aggressiveness against phytopathogen, and potential in promoting 
plant growth and defense mechanisms. Trichoderma is a widespread genus with 
enormous population densities that can be found in any habitat. The Trichoderma 
suppress the pathogen by using the following various modes of action.

(A) Competition

It is a phenomenon where the pathogen and the newly introduced biocontrol 
agent (antagonist) compete for resources and space. The antagonist may inhibit 
the expansion of the pathogen population in the rhizosphere during this process, 
hence preventing the onset of disease. The nutrient-poor conditions are typically 
seen in soils and on the surfaces of plant growth. Evidence suggests that managing 
the incidence and severity of disease depends upon competition between pathogens 
and non-pathogens for nutrient resources. In opposition to diseases that germinate 
directly on plant surfaces and infect through appressoria and infection pegs, soil-
borne pathogens that infect through mycelial contact are typically more vulnerable 
to competition from other soil- and plant-associated pathogens. The most prevalent 
nonpathogenic plant-associated microorganisms are typically believed to protect 

112

(B) Antibiosis

the plant by aggressively colonizing the minimal substrates that are available and 
preventing any from being left for pathogens to develop on. These microorganisms 
produce additionally compounds that inhibit pathogens. 

Indeed, many microorganisms, including Trichoderma species, are known to produce 
and secrete substances with antibiotic properties. These compounds play a significant 
role in biocontrol, as they help inhibit the growth and colonization of plant pathogens, 
leading to disease management. Trichoderma strains have been extensively studied 
for their ability to produce a variety of volatile and nonvolatile substances that 
exhibit antimicrobial activity. Some of the key compounds produced by Trichoderma 
include harzianic acid, alamanthicins, tricholin, peptaibol antibiotics, massoilacetone, 
6-pethyl-a-pyron, viridian, glioviridin, gliosporenins, heptelidic, and other metabolites 
have been described as compounds produced from these metabolites. 

These compounds help Trichoderma compete with and suppress plant pathogens, 
making it an effective biocontrol agent for disease management in agriculture and 
horticulture. Trichoderma’s ability to produce a wide array of antimicrobial substances 
is one of the reasons it has been extensively studied and utilized for sustainable plant 
protection strategies.

(C) Mycoparasitism

The infection of other fungi by the antagonistic fungi is known as mycoparasitism. The 
mechanism involves different stages of interaction. The antagonist fungi are attracted 
to the pathogenic fungi by their chemical stimulus, which results in a chemotropic 
response from the antagonist. In second stage, lectins assist in identifying between the 
pathogen and the antagonist. In third stage, the interactions between the antagonist 
and the pathogen’s hyphae come next. The antagonist (Trichoderma) hyphae either 
grow beside the host hyphae or coil around it and secrete several lytic enzymes 
(chitinase, glucanase, and pectinase) that are involved in the mycoparasitism process. 

(D) Triggering of plant defense mechanisms 

1.  Induction of Systemic Acquired Resistance (SAR): Trichoderma can activate the 
systemic acquired resistance (SAR) pathway in plants. This response is triggered 
when the plant perceives the presence of Trichoderma or other beneficial microbes. 
The activation of SAR leads to the accumulation of pathogenesis-related (PR) 
proteins, which play a crucial role in plant defense against pathogens. These PR 
proteins make the plant more resistant to various pathogens and help combat 
potential infections effectively.

113

2.  Induced Systemic Resistance (ISR): Trichoderma can also induce induced 
systemic resistance (ISR) in plants. Through interactions with the plant’s roots 
and the rhizosphere, Trichoderma can trigger the production of jasmonic acid 
( JA) and/or ethylene in the plant. These signaling molecules then activate ISR, 
which primes the plant’s immune system for a more rapid and effective response 
to potential pathogen attacks. ISR does not involve the accumulation of PR 
proteins but still enhances the plant’s defense capabilities.

(E) Promotion of Plant Growth

Trichoderma strains are characterized as symbiotic, opportunistic, avirulent organisms 
that can colonize plant roots by a process similar to that of mycorhizal fungi and 
produce substances that promote plant growth and development and defense 
mechanisms. Trichoderma strains frequently improve root growth and development, 
crop productivity, resistance to abiotic stresses, and nutrient uptake (Harman et al. 
2004).

1.  Root growth promotion: Trichoderma can stimulate root growth and 
branching, leading to a more extensive and robust root system. A well-
developed root system enhances nutrient and water uptake by the plant, 
improving overall plant health and growth.

2.  Nutrient solubilization: Trichoderma possesses the ability to solubilize 
certain nutrients, such as phosphorus and iron, in the soil. This process makes 
these nutrients more available to the plant, leading to improved nutrient 
uptake and utilization.

3.  Phytohormone  production:  Trichoderma  can  produce  and  release 
phytohormones like auxins and gibberellins, which influence various 
aspects of plant growth and development, such as cell elongation and seed 
germination.

4.  Enhanced stress tolerance: Trichoderma treated plants often exhibit 
increased resistance to abiotic stresses, such as drought, salinity, and extreme 
temperatures. The presence of Trichoderma induces changes in the plant’s 
physiology and metabolism, making it more resilient to adverse environmental 
conditions

Why Trichoderma spp. act as ideal bioagents ( Jeyarajan and Nakkeeran 2000) 

The following characteristics makes Trichoderma spp. as an ideal bioagent;

i.  High rhizosphere competence

ii.  Highly competitive saprophytic ability

114

iii.  Enhanced plant growth

iv.  Ease for mass multiplication

v.  Broad spectrum of action

vi.  Excellent and reliable control

vii.  Safe to environment

viii. Compatible with other bioagents

ix.  Tolerate to desiccation, heat, oxidizing agents and UV radiations

Mass multiplication techniques 

The biological control is an effective and eco-friendly approach for controlling 
many plant diseases. Further, biological control strategy is highly compatible with 
sustainable agriculture and is an important component of integrated pest management 
(IPM) programme. The success of biological control depends on mass production 
of the biocontrol agent in laboratory. The large scale availability of the pathogen is 
a primary requirement in the biocontrol programmed. For a successful integrated 
pest management programme, the bioagents should be amenable to easy and cheap 
mass multiplication. The mass production of bioagent is achieved through solid and 
liquid fermentation techniques.

1.  Solid state fermentation technique

It is a mass multiplication process of bioagents in which insoluble materials in water 
is used for the microbial growth. It is an effective method for the mass production 
of fungal bioagents, since it provides large amount of biomass (mycelium or spore). 
In this method, various cheap cereal grains such as; sorghum, millets, ragi are utilized 
as substrates.

2.  Liquid state fermentation technique

It is a mass multiplication process of bioagents in which soluble materials in water 
is used for the microbial growth. It is an effective method for the mass production 
of fungal as well as bacterial bioagents. In this method, Potato dextrose broth, V-8 
juice, Molasses-yeast medium are generally used for the mass production of bioagents.

Mass Multiplication of Fungal Bioagent- Trichoderma sp.

Isolation of Trichoderma sp. from soil

 » Trichoderma is isolated from the soil by using serial dilution technique in 

laboratory. 

 » Collect soil samples from the field, mix well and make it into fine particles. 

115

Soil samples should be collected in root zone at 5-15 cm depth and from 
rhizosphere wherever possible. 

 » Ten gram of soil sample is taken and suspended in 100 ml of sterile distilled 

water and stirred well to get uniform dilution. 

 » Transfer one ml from this to 9 ml of sterile water in a test tube to get 1: 100 
(10-2) dilution. Make serial dilutions by transferring one ml of suspension 
to subsequent tubes to get dilution of 1:10,000 (10-4). 

 » Transfer one ml of the desired soil suspension to sterile petriplates. Pour 
15 ml of sterilized, melted and cooled Trichoderma selective medium in the 
same petriplates. 

 » Rotate the plate gently and allow to solidify, incubate at room temperature 

for 5-7 days and observe for the development of fungal colonies. 

 » Trichoderma colonies will be white initially and turn to green. Count the 
number of colonies developing in individual plates. Transfer the individual 
colonies to potato dextrose agar slants for future use.

 » After getting the pure culture of Trichoderma, it can be mass multiply by 

using following methods.

(A) Solid state fermentation 

Procedure

powder of Trichoderma.

1.  Cheap cereal grains such as; sorghum, millets, ragi are used to prepare pure 

2.  Wash and soak the grains in water for 12 hrs. or give 2-3 water wash to the 
grain after washing boil the grain up to half cooked, to avoid contamination 
add antibiotics in it  after that filled in 250 ml flasks @ 100g/flask or in half 
kg polypropylene bags @ 150 g /bag.

3.  Plug the flasks and bags with non-absorbent cotton plug (with the help 
of plastic pipe neck). Autoclave it at 1210 C temperature and 15 lbs psi for 
15 min.

4.  After cooling to room temperature, inoculate the flasks or bags with 4-6 bits 
of actively growing culture of Trichoderma sp. from pure culture. Incubate 
the bags at 280C for 4-5 days. Incubation period may be varied depending 
upon green sporulation developed in bag/flask.

5.  After few days, the colonized grains turn into green color due to spore 
produce by the fungi. Then colonized grains are emptied into plastic trays 

116

and sieved through a normal coarse (50 mesh size) and fine (80 mesh size) 
sieves, simultaneously to obtain a very fine pure powder.

6.  This pure powder is later mixed with talcum powder in a ratio of 10 g 
pure powder + 1 kg talc powder (commercial grade) to get the commercial 
formulation. 10% Carboxy Methyl Cellulose (CMC) is also added as a sticker.

7.  It is packed in polythene beg, keep it in cool and dry place and utilized it 

within 4 months.

(b) Liquid state fermentation 

Procedure

1.  Molasses yeast medium good for liquid fermentation. Prepare molasses 
yeast medium (molasses-30 gram, yeast powder-5 gram, distilled water 1000 
ml) by mixing the ingredients of respective medium in conical flasks/glass 
bottles and sterilized it at 1210 C temperature and 15 lbs psi for 15 min.

2.  After cooling at room temperature, inoculate this medium with mycelia and 

spore bits of Trichoderma sp. from 10 day old pure culture. 

3.  Incubate the flasks at room temperature either as stationary culture for 3-4 
days or on a rotary shaker at 150-180 rpm for 2-3 days. Incubation period 
may be varied depending upon the mycelia mat and spores developed in 
medium. This is serves as mother culture.

4.  Generally, molasses yeast medium is prepared in an automatic fermenter 
and sterilized. Then, the mother culture which is prepared earlier is added 
to the fermenter @ 1.5 liter/50 liters of medium and incubated at room 
temperature for 10 days. 

5.  After the development of mycelia mat and spores in broth. The fungal 
biomass and broth are directly mixed with talc powder at 1:2 ratio. The 
mixture is air dried and mixed with carboxy methyl cellulose (CMC) @ 10 
g/ kg of the product. 

6.  Later, this mixed product is packed in polythene beg keep it in cool and dry 

place and utilized it within 4 months.

Advantage of liquid carrier media

Using liquid carrier media for mass multiplication of Trichoderma offers several 
advantages over other methods, such as solid-state fermentation. Some of the key 
advantages include,

117

1.  Homogeneous and consistent growth: Liquid carrier media provide a well-
mixed and uniform environment for Trichoderma growth. This ensures consistent 
propagation of the fungus throughout the medium, resulting in a higher yield 
of viable propagules.

2.  Higher spore production: Liquid media generally promote higher spore 
production compared to solid media. This is beneficial when aiming for mass 
multiplication of Trichoderma, as a higher spore count means more efficient 
disease control and better results in plant growth promotion.

3.  Easy scalability: Liquid fermentation is easily scalable, making it suitable for 
large-scale production of Trichoderma. It allows for the production of substantial 
quantities of biopesticides or biofungicides to meet agricultural demands

4.  Enhanced nutrient availability: The nutrients in liquid carrier media are readily 
available to the Trichoderma culture, promoting rapid growth and increasing the 
biomass production. This leads to a higher concentration of beneficial metabolites 
and enzymes produced by Trichoderma that contribute to disease suppression 
and plant growth stimulation.

5.  Improved aeration and oxygen supply: Liquid media provide better aeration 
and oxygen supply to the Trichoderma culture compared to solid media. Sufficient 
oxygen is crucial for aerobic fermentation and the growth of Trichoderma, leading 
to healthier and more vigorous cultures.

6.  Efficient nutrient uptake: The nutrients in liquid carrier media are typically 
more accessible to Trichoderma, leading to more efficient nutrient uptake and 
utilization. This results in faster growth and higher yields of viable spores.

7.  Easy product recovery: Harvesting Trichoderma from liquid media is often 
simpler and less labor-intensive than from solid substrates. The liquid fermentation 
process allows for easier separation of the fungal biomass from the liquid, 
simplifying the downstream processing steps.

8.  Reduced contamination risk: Liquid media can be sterilized more effectively than 
solid media, reducing the risk of contamination from unwanted microorganisms. 
This is essential for maintaining the purity and efficacy of the  Trichoderma 
biopesticides or biofungicides.

The use of affordable and readily available solid materials as substrate substitutes 
for synthetic solid media in Trichoderma mass multiplication is a practical and 
sustainable approach. As mentioned, traditional substrates like glucose, cellulose, 
soluble starch, and molasses can be scarce and expensive, making them less practical 
for large-scale production (Gupta et al. 1997). By utilizing materials such as sawdust, 

118

rotting wheat grains, rice husk, and vegetable waste, researchers can not only reduce 
production costs but also make use of agricultural and food industry by-products, 
turning them into valuable resources (Khan et al. 2011). This approach aligns with 
the principles of circular economy and waste reduction.

However, it is important to acknowledge that solid-state fermentation using 
these natural substrates has its limitations, as stated in the disadvantages. These include 
the need for a larger amount of substrate compared to liquid fermentation, which 
may be an issue for some applications where cost-effectiveness and production scale 
are critical factors. Contamination is another concern with solid-state fermentation. 

Although using natural substrates can contribute to nutrient diversity and 
help establish a favorable microbial community, it also creates a risk of unwanted 
microorganisms colonizing the medium, potentially reducing the efficacy and 
consistency of the final Trichoderma product. Extended fermentation times are often 
associated with solid-state fermentation due to the slower diffusion of nutrients and 
oxygen into the substrates. This can be a drawback when a rapid production cycle 
is required

On the other hand, liquid fermentation offers various advantages. As mentioned 
earlier, it provides a more homogeneous and nutrient-rich environment, leading to 
higher spore production and faster growth. It is also easier to control and sterilize 
liquid media, reducing contamination risks. Additionally, the ease of handling and 
scalability of liquid fermentation make it a favorable choice for mass multiplication.

Different formulation of Trichoderma

1.  Talc based formulation

Trichoderma is grown in a liquid medium, incorporated into tale powder in a 1:2 
ratio, and dried to an 8% moisture level while being shaded. This formulation had a 
three to four-month shelf life. In India, treating seeds at a rate of 4 to 5 g/kg seed 
has proved highly effective for controlling a number of soil-borne diseases that affect 
a variety of crops ( Jeyarajan, 2006) ( Jeyarajan et al. 1994).

2.  Oil-based formulation

They are created by creating a stable emulsion by mixing the conidia collected from 
the solid state/liquid state fermentation with a combination of vegetable/mineral oils. 
In such formulations, microbial agents are suspended with the help of a surface-active 
substance in a water-immiscible solvent such as a petroleum fraction (diesel, mineral 
oils), and vegetable oils (groundnut, etc.). This can be mixed with water to create an 
emulsion that is stable. For quickly homogenous emulsion formation upon dilution 
in water, emulsifiable concentrates require a high concentration of an oil soluble 

119

emulsifying ingredient. The oils utilized shouldn’t be harmful to plants, humans, 
animals, or spores of fungus. These Trichoderma formulations are right now applied 
directly as sprays. Oil-based formulations are considered to have an extended shelf life 
and are appropriate for foliar sprays in dry weather. The oil coating the spores protects 
them from drying out and lets them to survive longer on the plant surface even in 
dry weather. For the sole purpose of combating Botrytis cinerea post-harvest apple 
rot, T. harzianum emulsion formulation has been developed. At the earlier Project 
Directorate of Biological Control (PDBC) in India, an invert-emulsion formulation 
of T. harzianum with an 8-month shelf life has been developed using ingredients 
that are accessible locally. This formulation has been evaluated and found to be 
effective against groundnut diseases that are spread through the soil (Batta, 2005).

3.  Pesta granules based formulation

In pesta granules formulation, 100 g of wheat flour and 52 ml of fermenter biomass 
are mixed with gloved hands to produce a cohesive dough. Hand actions are used 
to frequently squeeze, fold, and knead the dough. After that, one mm thick sheets 
(known as pesta) are made and air dried till they break easily. Following drying, the 
dough sheet was broken down and fed through an 18-mesh screen, and the granules 
were gathered (Connick et al. 1991).

4.  Alginate prills based formulation

Food base is suspended in another portion (50 g/250 ml), while sodium alginate 
is dissolved in one piece of distilled water (25g/750ml). These preparations are 
autoclaved, cooled, and then combined with biomass. To create spherical beads 
that are air-dried and kept at 5°C, the mixture is added drop by drop to the CaCl2 
solution (Fravel et al. 1999).

5.  Vermiculite wheat bran-based formulation

For 10 days, Trichoderma is multiplied in molasses-yeast media. 33 g of wheat bran 
and 100 g of vermiculite are sterilized for three days at 70 °C in an oven. Then, 20 
g of fermenter biomass, 0.05 N medium, and concentrated or naturally derived 
biomass with HCI are added, thoroughly combined, and then dried in the shade 
(Lewis, 1991).

6.  Coffee husk-based formulation

A Trichoderma mixture was created using coffee husk, a byproduct of the coffee curing 
business. This product, which is popular in Kerala and Karnataka, was very successful 
in treating Phytophthora foot rot of black pepper (Sawant and Sawant 1996).

120

7.  Press mud-based formulation 

The sugar factory produces press mud, which can be utilized as a substrate for 
Trichoderma to multiply in large quantities. The process involves evenly blending 
a 9-day-old T. viride culture grown in potato dextrose broth with 120 kg of press 
mud. To keep it moist, water was intermittently poured in. Gunny bags were used 
to cover this in order to allow air and trap moisture in the shade. Nucleus culture 
for subsequent multiplication is ready in 25 days. The same mixture was mixed 
completely, added to 8 tons of press mud, and then incubated for 8 days in the shade 
before being used in the field. By doing this, we increased the number of inoculums 
in the soil by 8000 times over the doses of biopesticides that are recommended 
causing them to have immediate impact. Similar to this, additional substances could 
also be utilized in an efficient manner for the mass-level multiplication of various 
bioagents (Sabalpara, 2014).

Shelf life of Trichoderma 

Trichoderma based formulations or biofungicides are widely used in agriculture and 
horticulture to control various plant diseases and promote plant growth. The shelf life of 
a Trichoderma formulation refers to the duration for which the product remains viable 
and effective when stored under appropriate conditions. The shelf life of Trichoderma 
formulations can vary depending on several factors, including the specific Trichoderma 
species used, the formulation type (powder, granules, liquid, etc.), the manufacturing 
process, and the storage conditions. Typically, shelf life is measured in terms of the 
number of viable colony-forming units (CFUs) present in the product.

For most Trichoderma formulations, the shelf life ranges from six months to two 
years from the date of manufacture. More than 18 months shelf life of Trichoderma 
observed in coffee husk. Trichoderma formulations with a talc, peat, lignite, or kaolin 
base have a three to four-month shelf life. (Sankar and Jeyarajan 1996). However, to 
ensure optimal performance, it is crucial to store the product correctly. Trichoderma 
formulations should be kept in a cool, dry place, away from direct sunlight and 
extreme temperatures, as high temperatures and humidity can significantly reduce 
the viability of the fungal spores. As the product ages, the number of viable spores 
in the formulation may gradually decline. The population of T. viride appears to be 
most prevalent in milky white bags with a 100-micron thickness. Consequently, 
using older Trichoderma formulations might result in reduced efficacy in disease 
control and plant growth promotion. 

It is advisable to check the expiration date before purchasing and to use the 
product within the recommended period to achieve the best results. Regularly 
updating Trichoderma products and adhering to proper storage practices can help 

121

maximize their benefits in sustainable agriculture and disease management. The 
work on prolonging the shelf life of Trichoderma formulations has been carried out at 
PDBC Bangalore using various components (chitin and glycerol) in the production 
medium and heat shock at the end of the log phase of fermentation. This procedure 
can extend the shelf life of Trichoderma formulations by up to a year. (Sriram et al. 
2010 and 2011).

Characteristics of an ideal formulation of Trichoderma

An ideal formulation of Trichoderma, a beneficial fungus used in agriculture and 
horticulture for its biocontrol and plant growth-promoting properties, should possess 
the following characteristics

1.  High viability: The formulation should contain live and viable Trichoderma 
spores that remain effective during storage and application. High spore viability 
ensures better performance in the field.

2.  High population density: The formulation should have a high concentration 
of Trichoderma spores to ensure effective colonization and rapid establishment 
on plant roots and in the rhizosphere.

3.  Broad spectrum of activity: The ideal formulation should be capable of combating 
a wide range of plant pathogens, including various types of fungi, bacteria, 
and nematodes. This broad-spectrum activity allows it to protect plants from 
different diseases

4.  Compatibility with other products: The formulation should be compatible 
with commonly used agricultural inputs, such as fertilizers and pesticides. This 
ensures that Trichoderma can be integrated into existing farming practices 
without adverse effects on other beneficial organisms

5.  Long shelf life: Stability during storage is crucial for commercial viability. The 

formulation should have a long shelf life while maintaining its efficacy

6.  Easy application: The formulation should be user-friendly and easy to apply 
through various methods, such as seed treatment, soil application, or foliar spray

7.  Resistance to environmental stress: Trichoderma should be able to tolerate a 
wide range of environmental conditions, including temperature fluctuations, 
UV radiation, and soil pH variations, to remain active and effective in different 
climates and soil types

8.  Safe for non-target organisms: An ideal Trichoderma formulation should be 
harmless to non-target organisms, including beneficial insects, earthworms, and 
other microorganisms in the soil.

122

9.  Enhanced plant growth promotion: Apart from disease suppression, the 
formulation should promote plant growth by producing growth-promoting 
substances, stimulating root development, and enhancing nutrient uptake.

10.  Ecologically friendly: The formulation should be environmentally friendly, 

biodegradable, and not contribute to pollution or harmful residues.

11.  Scientifically proven efficacy: The effectiveness of the formulation should be 
supported by scientific research and field trials to ensure farmers’ confidence in 
its performance.

12.  Cost-effective: The formulation should be economically feasible and provide a 

cost-effective solution for farmers to improve crop health and yield.

Overall, an ideal formulation of Trichoderma should combine effective disease 
control with plant growth promotion, safety for the environment, and ease of use 
to be widely adopted in sustainable agriculture practices.

Different method for Trichoderma application

1.  Seed treatment: Mix 6 - 10 g of Trichoderma powder per kg of seed before sowing.
2.  Nursery treatment: Apply 10 - 25 g of Trichoderma powder per 100 m2 of nursery 
bed. Application of neem cake and FYM before treatment increases the efficacy.

3.  Cutting and seedling root dip: Mix 10 g of Trichoderma powder along with 
100 g of well-decomposed FYM per liter of water and dip the cuttings and 
seedlings for 10 minutes before planting.

4.  Soil treatment: Apply 5 kg of Trichoderma powder per hectare after turning 
of sun hemp or dhaincha into the soil for green manuring or mix 1 kg of 
Trichoderma formulation in 100 kg of farmyard manure and cover it for 7 days 
with polythene. Sprinkle the heap with water intermittently. Turn the mixture 
in every 3-4 days interval and then broadcast in the field.

5.  Aerial spraying / Wound dressing: Trichoderma has been successful applied to the 
aerial plant parts for the biocontrol of decay fungi in wounds on shrubs and trees.

6.  Plant Treatment: Drench the soil near stem region with 10 g Trichoderma 

powder mixed in a liter of water.

Precaution while using Trichoderma as a bioagent

 » Choose the appropriate Trichoderma strain that is specifically effective against 
the target pathogen or for the intended plant growth promotion. Different 
Trichoderma species and strains have varying levels of effectiveness against 
different pathogens.

123

 » Ensure that you are using a high-quality Trichoderma formulation from a 
reputable source. The product should have a viable and sufficient number 
of colony-forming units (CFUs) to be effective.

 » Avoid use of Trichoderma in extreme temperatures, excessively high or low 
pH levels, and harsh environmental conditions that could stress the fungus.
 » Don’t use chemical pesticides after application of Trichoderma for 10-15 days.
 »
If you plan to use Trichoderma with other agricultural inputs, conduct 
compatibility tests to ensure that there are no adverse interactions between 
them.

 » Don’t use Trichoderma in dry soil because moisture is an essential factor for 

its growth and survivability.

 » Don’t put the treated seeds in direct sun rays.
 » Don’t keep the treated FYM for longer duration.
 » Applying excessive amounts of Trichoderma may not provide additional 

benefits and could lead to wastage and unnecessary expenses.

 » When handling Trichoderma formulations, wear appropriate protective 
clothing, such as gloves and a mask, to avoid direct contact with the product.
 » Regularly monitor the treated plants for signs of disease control or growth 
promotion.  Evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  Trichoderma  and  adjust  the 
application strategy if needed.

Conclusion

In conclusion, the mass production technology of Trichoderma has undergone 
significant advancements, transforming it from a laboratory curiosity to a commercially 
viable bioagent in agriculture. The use of liquid carrier media has emerged as a 
preferred method for large-scale production due to its scalability, homogeneity, 
and higher spore yield compared to solid-state fermentation. The development of 
affordable and readily available solid materials as substrate substitutes has addressed 
the scarcity and high cost of traditional synthetic solid media. Utilizing agricultural 
and food industry by-products such as sawdust, rice husk, and vegetable waste not 
only reduces production costs but also promotes sustainability by turning waste into 
valuable resources.

Trichoderma, with its diverse qualities, has shown great potential in agriculture. 
It can effectively reduce abiotic stresses, enhance physiological responses, and improve 
nutrient uptake in plants. Moreover, its role as an effective antagonist against plant 

124

pathogens has led to successful biological control, reducing the reliance on chemical 
pesticides and promoting eco-friendly pest management. 

Innovative formulations combining biocontrol and biofertilization capabilities 
have further enhanced Trichoderma’s efficacy, making it more potent and versatile 
against a wider range of diseases and promoting plant growth. However, the 
commercial application of Trichoderma also presents challenges, including associated 
costs and the need for strategic application. Ongoing research and development 
are essential to optimize production processes, improve formulation efficacy, and 
fine-tune application strategies to ensure cost-effectiveness and maximum impact 
on agricultural practices.

As we continue to explore the potential of Trichoderma and harness its beneficial 
properties, it holds great promise in contributing to sustainable agriculture, promoting 
food security, and mitigating the environmental impacts of conventional agricultural 
practices. By utilizing mass production technology effectively and responsibly, Trichoderma 
can play a pivotal role in shaping a more sustainable and resilient agricultural future.

Future Prospect

The future prospects for the mass production technology of Trichoderma are 
promising, driven by advancements in biotechnology, fermentation processes, and 
the growing demand for sustainable and eco-friendly agricultural solutions. Some 
potential areas of development include

1.  Strain selection and optimization: Continued research on Trichoderma strains can 
lead to the discovery of new, more effective biocontrol agents and biofertilizers. 
Genetic and metabolic engineering may be employed to enhance specific traits, 
such as stress tolerance, nutrient utilization, and disease suppression capabilities.

2.  Bioprocess optimization: Further optimization of liquid fermentation processes 
can improve spore yield, viability, and overall productivity. Advancements in 
bioreactor design and process control can lead to more efficient and cost-effective 
mass production of Trichoderma.

3.  Substrate utilization: Research on alternative and renewable substrates for 
Trichoderma cultivation can help reduce production costs and reliance on limited 
resources. This may involve exploring waste materials from various industries 
or agricultural by-products as potential substrates.

4.  Encapsulation and formulation: Developing innovative formulations and 
encapsulation techniques can enhance the shelf life and stability of Trichoderma 
products. These advancements can improve their viability during storage and 
transportation, expanding their accessibility to remote area.

125

5.  Biological nanotechnology: Emerging technologies, such as nanotechnology, 
may open new possibilities for delivering Trichoderma and its bioactive compounds 
more efficiently to plants. Nano-formulations could improve the bioavailability 
and targeted delivery of Trichoderma for maximum efficacy.

6.  Integration with precision agriculture: Integrating Trichoderma-based products 
with precision agriculture technologies, such as drones and sensors, can optimize 
application strategies based on real-time data. This can lead to precise and targeted 
treatments, reducing wastage and enhancing cost-effectiveness.

7.  Combined biocontrol approaches: Combining Trichoderma with other beneficial 
microorganisms or biocontrol agents could create synergistic effects for improved 
disease suppression and overall plant health. Understanding the interactions 
between different beneficial microbes can lead to effective biocontrol consortia.

8.  Climate-smart  solutions:  Research  on  Trichoderma  strains  adapted  to 
specific climatic conditions can offer climate-smart solutions for regions facing 
environmental challenges, such as increased drought or salinity.

9.  Regulatory support: Governments and regulatory bodies play a vital role in 
supporting the mass production and commercialization of Trichoderma-based 
products. Streamlined regulations, incentives, and subsidies can promote its 
adoption in agriculture.

As agriculture faces the challenges of feeding a growing global population 
while minimizing environmental impacts, the future of Trichoderma mass production 
technology holds immense potential. By combining scientific advancements with 
sustainable practices, Trichoderma can play a crucial role in shaping a more resilient and 
eco-friendly agricultural sector. Continued research, development, and collaborative 
efforts among scientists, policymakers, and industry stakeholders will drive the 
successful implementation of Trichoderma-based solutions in the years to come.

References

Batta, Y. A. (2005). Postharvest biological control of apple gray mold by Trichoderma 
harzianum formulated in an invert emulsion. Crop Protection, 23(1): 19-26.

Connick, W., Daigle, D. and Quimby, P. (1991). An improved invert emulsion with 
high water retention for mycoherbicide delivery, Weed Technology, 5: 442-444.

Fravel, D. R., Rhodes, D. J. and Larkin, R. P. (1999). Production and commercialization 
of biocontrol products. In: Integrated pest and disease management in greenhouse 
crops (Albajes, R., Lodovica Gullino, M., Van Lenteren, J. C. and Elad, Y. eds.), 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston pp. 365-376.

126

Gupta, R., Saxena, R. K. and Goel, S. (1997). Short Communication: Photoinduced 
sporulation in Trichoderma harzianum–an experimental approach to primary 
events. World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology, 13(2): 249-250.

Harman, G. E., Howell, C. R., Viterbo, A., Chet. I. and Lorito, M. (2004). Trichoderma 
sp. -opportunistic, avirulent plant symbionts. Nature Reviews, 2: 43-56.

Howell, C. R. (2013). Mechanisms employed by Trichoderma species in the biological 
control of plant diseases. The history and evolution of current concepts. Plant 
diseases, 87(1): 5-9.

Jeyarajan, R. (2006). Prospects of indigenous mass production and formulation of 
Trichroderma, In current status of biological control of plant diseases using 
antagonistic organisms in India (Eds Rabindra RJ Ramanujam B),  Project 
Directorate of Biological Control, Bangalore, pp. 74-80, 445.

Jeyarajan, R. and Nakkeeran, S. (2000). Exploitation of microorganisms and viruses 
as biocontrol agents for crop disease management. In: Biocontrol Potential and 
their Exploitation in Sustainable agriculture, (Ed. Upadhyay et al.,) Kluwer 
Academic/Plenum Publishers, USA pp. 95-116.

Jeyarajan, R., Ramakrishnan, G., Dinakaran, D. and Sridar, R. (1994). Development 
of products of Trichoderma viride and Bacillus subtilis for biocontrol of root 
rot diseases. In “Biotechnology in India” (Ed Dwivedi B.K.) Bioved Research 
Society, Allahabad. pp. 25-36.

Khan, S., Bagwan, N. B., Iqbal M. A. and Tamboli, R. R. (2011). Mass multiplication 
and shelf life of liquid fermented final product of Trichoderma viride in different 
formulations. Advance in Bioresearch, 2(1): 178-182.

Lewis, J. A. (1991). Formulation and delivery system of biocontrol agents with 
emphasis on fungi Beltsville symposia. In: The rhizosphere and plant growth 
(Keister, D. L. and Cregan, P. B. eds.). Agricultural Research, 14: 279-287.

Parkash, V. and Saikia, A. J. (2015). Production and multiplication of native compost 
fungal activator by using different substrates and its influence on growth and 
development of Capsicum chinensis Jacq. ‘‘Bhut Jolokia. Int Biotechnol Research 
Article ID 481363. DOI: 10.1155/2015/481363.

Sabalpara, A. N. (2014). Mass multiplication of biopesticides at farm level. Journal 

of Mycology and Plant Pathology, 44(1): 1-5.

Sankar, P. and Jeyarajan, R. (1996). Biological control of sesamum root rot by seed 
treatment with Trichoderma spp. and Bacillus subtilis. Indian Journal of Mycology 
and Plant Pathology, 26: 147-53.

127

Seethapathy, P., Kurusamy, R. and Kuppusamy, P. (2017). Soil borne diseases of major 

pulses and their biological management. An Int J Agri., 2(1): 1-11.

Sriram, S., Palanna, K. B.  and Ramanujam, B. (2010). Effect of chitin on the shelf 
life of Trichoderma harzianum in talc formulation. Indian Journal of Agriculture 
Sciences, 80: 930-932.

Sriram, S., Roopa, K. P. and Savitha, M. J. (2011). Extended shelf- life of liquid 
fermentation derived talc formulations of Trichoderma harzianum with the 
addition of glycerol. Crop protection, 30: 1334-1339.

Subash, N., Viji, J., Sasikumar, C. and Meenakshisundaram, M. (2013). Isolation, 
media optimization and formulation of Trichoderma harizanum in agricultural 
soil. J of Microbiol and Biotechnol., 3(1): 61-64.

Swant, I. S. and Sawant, S. D. (1996). A simple method for achieving high cfu 
of Trichoderma harzianum on organic wastes for field applications.  Indian 
Phytopathology, 9: 185-87.

Woo,  S.  L.,  Ruocco,  M.,  Vinale,  F.,  Lombardi,  N.,  Pascale,  A.,  Lanzuise,  S., 
Manganiello, G. and Lorito, M. (2014). Trichoderma based products and 
their wide spread use in agriculture. The Open Mycology J., 8: 71-126. DOI: 
10.2174/1874437001408010071

128

10

Uncovering and Preserving 

Bio-Agents

Jyoti Kumari1, Ankit Kumar Singh2, Kumar Aditya3 and Puja Kumari4
1Ph.D. Scholar, Deptt. of Plant Pathology, RAC, BAU, Kanke, Ranchi, JH
2Ph.D. Scholar, Deptt. of Entomology, RAC, BAU, Kanke, Ranchi, JH
3Ph.D. Scholar, Deptt. of Plant Pathology, IAS, BHU, Varanasi, U.P.
4Ph.D. Scholar, Deptt. of Plant Pathology, BAU, Sabour, Bihar

Abstract

Pathogens and bioagents that affect plant health are studied in plant pathology. In 
order to effectively control disease, conduct research, and promote conservation, 
it is essential for plant pathology to find and preserve bio-agents. Finding and 
identifying pathogens is the first step in the process of discovering bio-agents. For 
precise and quick detection, a variety of methods are used, including molecular 
diagnostics, serological assays, and microscopy. Identification entails employing 
genetic, morphological, or biochemical markers to characterize the bio-agents at 
the species or strain level. Researchers can better comprehend bio-agents’ biology, 
pathogenicity, and interactions with host plants thanks to the knowledge they have 
learned about them. Discovering and following the distribution and dynamics of 
bio-agents depends heavily on surveillance and monitoring. In order to identify 
and track the appearance, dissemination, and effects of bioagents, these efforts need 
systematic and recurrent surveys of plants and agricultural systems. By facilitating 
the quick gathering, analysis, and interpretation of data, advanced technologies, such 
as remote sensing, geographic information systems (GIS), and big data analytics, 
improve surveillance and monitoring capabilities. Techniques for preservation are 
crucial for preserving the viability and stability of bioagents. For long-term storage 
and use of samples, a variety of preservation techniques are used, including drying, 
freezing, cryopreservation, and preservation in culture collections. By removing 

129

water from pathogens and plant materials, drying stops microbial development and 
enzymatic activity. 

Keywords:  Bio-agents,  Plant  Pathology,  Uncovering,  Preserving,  Detection, 
Identification, Surveillance, Monitoring, Preservation, Techniques.

Introduction

Biofactors, also called biological agents, play a key role in plant pathology as they 
comprise a wide variety of microorganisms and other biological entities that can 
cause plant diseases. Understanding biological agents is critical to effective disease 
management and sustainable agriculture (Agrios, 2005). Biofactors in plant pathology 
include bacteria, fungi, viruses, phytoplasma, viroids, nematodes and plant parasites. Each 
category of biological agents exhibits unique properties and mechanisms of infection 
that lead to different disease symptoms and plant health effects. For example, bacterial 
pathogens can cause wilt, necrosis, or canker, while fungal pathogens often cause leaf 
spot, downy mildew, or rot. Viruses can cause mosaic patterns, stunting, or deformity 
in infected plants, while nematodes can cause root thickening or cyst formation. 
Understanding the different types of biological agents is critical to accurately identifying 
and treating disease (Gaur et al., 2021 and Gnanamanickam& Immanuel, 2006).Bio-
agents have a significant impact on plant health, agricultural productivity and global 
food security.They can cause devastating diseases that result in crop losses, reduced 
crop quality, and higher productioncosts. Plant diseases caused by biological agents can 
also  result  in  trade  barriers  that  limit  the  internationalmovement  of 
agricultural products. In addition, biological agents can rapidly evolve, adapt 
to  new  hosts,  and  overcome  resistance,  posing  an  ongoing  challenge  to 
disease control efforts.

Through the creation of poisons or by entering plant tissues and upsetting 
normal physiological processes, bioagents can directly harm plants. They may also 
weaken plants, leaving them more vulnerable to secondary infections or environmental 
challenges, which could have an indirect impact on plant health. Additionally, 
some bio-agents can affect how plants grow and develop, leading to anomalies or 
malformations that reduce crop output in general.

Effective  disease  management  depends  on  the  accurate  detection  and 
identification of bio-agents. Microscopic examination, serological assays, molecular 
methods (such polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencing), and bioassays are 
some of the methods used for this aim. These techniques enable scientists and plant 
pathologists to pinpoint the precise bio-agent responsible for the illness, allowing 
for the implementation of focused control measures.

130

Techniques for identification and detection

Techniques for identification and detection are essential in plant pathology for 
making an accurate diagnosis of plant diseases and locating the accountable bio-
agents. Effective disease management tactics have substantially benefited from the 
development of these tools. An overview of the many identification and detection 
methods used in plant pathology, including microscopic analysis, serological assays, 
molecular methods, and bioassays, is provided in this article. In order to identify 
and detect bio-agents and enable focused disease control actions, each technique 
performs a specific function.

 » Microscopic Examination:For preliminary observations and the identification 
of bio-agents, microscopic inspection continues to be a crucial technique 
in plant pathology. This method entails using light or electron microscopes 
to see the morphological features of bio-agents like worms, bacterial cells, 
and fungal spores (Clark & Adams, 1977). Key characteristics, such as spore 
shape, the presence of conidiophores, or nematode stylet structure, can be 
identified through microscopic analysis. Additionally, staining methods can 
improve visibility and help with identification, such as lactophenol cotton 
blue. For quick preliminary identification of bio-agents in lab and field 
settings, microscopy is a flexible and affordable approach.

 »

Serological Assays:Immunological methods known as serological assays 
are used to identify certain antigens or antibodies linked to plant pathogens. 
The serological procedures immunoblotting (sometimes called Western 
blotting) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) are frequently 
used in plant pathology. These tests make use of antibodies that firmly 
attach to the target antigens, identifying and measuring the bio-agents. For 
the quick detection of bacterial, viral, and fungal diseases, serological tests 
are beneficial. They are especially helpful when a high sample throughput 
is required. They are commonly used in large-scale pathogen screening 
programmes and regular plant disease diagnostics.

 » Molecular Techniques:Through the development of extremely sensitive 
and focused methods for identifying and detecting bio-agents, molecular 
approaches have revolutionised plant pathology. The widely used molecular 
technique known as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplifies particular 
DNA sequences from the genomes of bio-agents. Pathogens can be quickly 
and precisely identified using PCR-based techniques such as multiplex 
PCR, real-time PCR (qPCR), and conventional PCR (Dasgupta, 2014). 
Additionally, bio-agents can have their entire genetic makeup determined using 

131

DNA sequencing techniques like Sanger sequencing and next-generation 
sequencing (NGS), which helps with identification and characterization. 
Additionally, molecular methods make it easier to find genetically unique 
strains or variants within a population of bioagents as well as to detect low-
level infections (Mullis &Faloona, 1987).

 » Bioassays:In  order  to  find  the  presence  of  bio-agents  or  assess  their 
pathogenicity, bioassays use living creatures like insect vectors or indicator 
plants. Following immunisation, indicator plants that are vulnerable to 
particular bioagents are employed to monitor illness symptoms or signs. 
One well-known application of a bioassay is the use of tobacco (Nicotiana 
tabacum) as an indicator plant for the detection of the Tobacco mosaic virus. 
Insects like aphids or leafhoppers are used in insect vector-based bioassays to 
distribute and transmit bioagents. These bioassays are useful for identifying 
viruses and phytoplasmas that are spread via insect vectors. Under controlled 
circumstances, bioassays offer useful information on pathogen infectivity, 
host range, and disease course.

 »

Integration of Techniques:To maximise accuracy and reliability, various 
identification and detection approaches are frequently combined in practise. 
A thorough assessment of the bio-agents present in a given sample is 
made possible by the combination of microscopic investigation, serological 
assays, and molecular approaches. The presence of particular antigens may 
be confirmed by serological assays, which are then followed by molecular 
techniques to identify the specific bio-agent at the genetic level. For instance, 
initial microscopic examination may disclose certain morphological traits. This 
multidisciplinary approach improves diagnostic precision, particularly when 
several bioagents are present in a sample or when they show morphological 
similarities.

Sample Collection and Preservation in Plant Pathology

To correctly diagnose and identify plant diseases and the associated bioagents, sample 
collection and preservation are essential processes in plant pathology. The gathered 
samples are kept intact during transportation and storage thanks to appropriate 
collection procedures and efficient preservation processes, enabling accurate laboratory 
analysis. In order to achieve the best sample quality and precise disease diagnosis, 
this article offers an overview of sample collecting and preservation techniques in 
plant pathology, including recommendations for collection, handling, and storage.

132

Sample Collection Guidelines:

For representative plant material that truly reflects the disease condition, proper 
sample collection is crucial. When collecting samples, the following rules should 
be followed:

1. Selected Sampling locations: Pick plants exhibiting typical disease symptoms 
as well as other sampling locations that represent the afflicted area. In addition, it’s 
crucial to get samples from various plant sections, such as leaves, stems, fruits, or 
roots, depending on the symptoms seen.

2. Sample Size: Gather a sufficient sample size to ensure there is enough data 
for analysis. Depending on the sort of study needed, the sample size may change, 
however it is typically advised to gather multiple samples from various plants within 
the affected area.

3. Sampling Instruments: To harvest plant samples, use clean, sterile instruments 
such scissors, knives, or pruners. Between sampling various plants, sterilise the 
instruments to avoid cross-contamination.

4. Sample Packaging: To avoid contamination, moisture loss, or desiccation, place 
the gathered plant samples in clear, labelled, and sealed plastic bags or containers. 
It could be required to incorporate absorbent material in the packaging for samples 
with high moisture content, such as fruits or tissues with high water content, to 
limit excess moisture.

5. Documentation: Note pertinent details about the sample, such as the site, the 
date, the type of plant it came from, its developmental stage, and any symptoms that 
were noticed. Accurate diagnosis and subsequent research or extension activities are 
made possible by this documentation.

Sample Handling and Transportation:

Proper handling and transportation of obtained samples are critical to maintain 
sample quality throughout transit to the laboratory. The following considerations 
should be taken into account:

1. Sample handling precautions: Handle samples gently to reduce contamination 
or mechanical damage. Avoid coming into contact with healthy plants or any other 
potential contaminating elements.

2. Temperature Control: Preserve proper temperatures while transporting samples. 
To avoid degradation or changes in sample properties, cool or refrigerate samples if 
necessary, particularly when delays in shipping are anticipated.

3. Rapid Transportation: Hasten the delivery of samples to the lab to reduce sample 

133

quality loss. Deliver samples as soon as feasible after collection, especially if they are 
living or likely to degrade quickly.

Sample Preservation Methods

To maintain their original properties and stop the deterioration of pathogens or 
biochemical components, gathered plant samples must be preserved. The type of 
sample and the particular analysis to be performed determine the preservation 
method to be used. In plant pathology, frequent preservation techniques include:

1. Refrigeration: Most plant samples can be preserved for a brief period of time by 
refrigeration at temperatures between 2 and 8 °C. The sample quality is maintained 
for a few days to a few weeks thanks to this method’s ability to slow down metabolic 
processes and inhibit the growth and activity of infections.

2. Freezing: For long-term preservation of plant samples, freezing is a successful 
technique. Depending on the precise requirements, samples can be frozen at -20°C 
or -80°C. The metabolic processes and pathogen growth are stopped by freezing, 
which prolongs the storage time of samples—sometimes even years.

3. Drying: Herbarium specimens, fruits, seeds, and other materials with a high 
moisture content can be preserved by drying. Depending on the type of sample 
and the required analysis, many drying techniques can be used, including air drying, 
oven drying, and freeze drying.

4. Chemical Fixatives: Plant samples are preserved using chemical fixatives like 
ethanol, formalin, or glycerol so they may be examined under a microscope or have 
their DNA examined. Fixatives maintain cellular structures and stop cell morphology 
from deteriorating or changing. The specific analysis and the sample’s properties 
will determine the fixative to use.

Disease Surveillance and Monitoring in Plant Pathology

In order to understand the occurrence, distribution, and dynamics of plant diseases 
and the bioagents that cause them, it is essential to conduct disease surveillance 
and monitoring. Early identification, prompt action, and well-informed decision-
making for disease management strategies are made possible by efficient surveillance 
programmes. This article gives a general overview of plant pathology’s disease 
surveillance and monitoring methods, including field research, remote sensing, and 
molecular diagnostic equipment.

 » Field Surveys:In order to evaluate the existence, severity, and distribution 
of plant diseases, field surveys, which involve systematic observations and 
sampling, are a crucial part of disease monitoring. In order to locate disease 

134

hotspots, track the spread of the illness, and calculate the incidence and 
prevalence of the disease, plant pathologists and researchers perform field 
surveys (Mundt, 2002). Various techniques are used during field surveys, 
such as visual observations, symptom evaluations, and sample gathering. 
These studies can be carried out through systematic transects, random 
sampling, or focused studies based on historical disease data or recognised 
risk factors. For illness monitoring, trend analysis, and early warning systems, 
field surveys offer useful data.

 » Remote Sensing:Various sensors and imaging systems are used in remote 
sensing techniques to identify and track plant diseases. Spectral data from 
plants is captured and analysed by remote sensing platforms, including 
satellites, flying drones, or ground-based sensors, to reveal the existence, 
severity, or stress of diseases. In plant pathology, multispectral, hyperspectral, 
and thermal imaging are frequently utilised remote sensing methods. Remote 
sensing can assist in identifying disease-related changes in plant physiology, 
canopy reflectance, or temperature by examining particular wavelengths 
or thermal trends. In order to detect and track disease outbreaks early on, 
remote sensing offers a speedy and extensive method of disease surveillance.
 » Molecular Diagnostic Tools:By enabling quick and precise bio-agent 
detection  in  plant  samples,  molecular  diagnostic  technologies  have 
revolutionised disease surveillance and monitoring in plant pathology. 
Pathogens can be detected and identified based on their unique nucleic 
acid sequences using molecular methods including quantitative PCR 
(qPCR), loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP), and polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR). With the use of these methods, pathogens at low 
concentrations in plant tissues can be found, and the results are extremely 
sensitive and precise. Additionally, complex microbial communities linked 
to plant diseases can be recognised and characterised thanks to genomic 
approaches like metagenomics and next-generation sequencing (NGS). 
Early detection, accurate identification, and monitoring of bio-agents in 
plants are made possible by molecular diagnostic techniques, allowing for 
quick responses and focused disease control measures.

 » Data Management and Analysis:Large volumes of data are produced by 
disease surveillance and monitoring, which call for efficient management and 
analysis. Data management and geographic information systems (GIS) aid 
in the organisation and visualisation of disease data, allowing for the spatial 
and temporal investigation of disease patterns. GIS enables the mapping of 
illness occurrences, the detection of disease clusters, and the evaluation of 

135

the migration and spread of diseases. The interpretation and modelling of 
disease data is made easier by the use of sophisticated statistical techniques 
such spatial analysis, trend analysis, and time-series analysis. For thorough 
disease surveillance and monitoring programmes, data integration, sharing, 
and cooperation among plant pathologists, researchers, and stakeholders 
are essential.

 » Early Warning Systems:The creation of early warning systems, which aim to 
give farmers, decision-makers, and stakeholders timely alerts and actionable 
information, is aided by disease surveillance and monitoring. Early warning 
systems assess disease risk and probable outbreaks by combining disease data 
with weather data, crop growth models, and predictive algorithms. Early 
warning systems can assist in the implementation of timely treatments, such as 
targeted pesticide applications, cultural practises, or resistant types, to reduce 
the effect of diseases by combining data from surveillance programmes and 
using prediction models. These solutions promote overall crop health, decrease 
economic losses, and improve disease management decision-making.

Biosecurity Measures in Plant Pathology

In plant pathology, biosecurity precautions are essential for stopping the introduction, 
establishment, and spread of hazardous bioagents that can cause deadly plant diseases. 
In order to safeguard agricultural systems, maintain plant health, and guarantee food 
security, effective biosecurity policies and practises are essential (Haque & Khan, 
2021). An overview of plant pathology’s biosecurity measures, such as containment 
facilities, surveillance systems, and legal frameworks, is given in this article. Plant 
pathologists and other interested parties can reduce the dangers associated with 
bioagents and protect plant health by putting in place strict biosecurity measures.
 » Quarantine Protocols:Fundamental biosecurity procedures including 
quarantine protocols are employed to prevent the cross-border movement 
of plant materials that could harbour bioagents. Regulations for quarantine 
are designed to stop the spread of invasive illnesses, pests, or weeds. To 
maintain compliance with phytosanitary requirements, plant material, 
whether seeds, cuttings, or live plants, is submitted to examination and 
certification (CABI, 2020). Facilities for quarantine, such plant inspection 
stations or border crossings, have qualified staff and diagnostic equipment 
to find and halt any hazardous bioagents. The first line of defence against 
the spread of novel plant diseases is quarantine procedures.

 » Containment Facilities:Specialised research or diagnostic labs known as 
containment facilities are created to handle and analyse high-risk bioagents 

136

 »

in a confined setting. To avoid the unintentional release of bioagents, these 
facilities adhere to stringent safety and containment standards that safeguard 
researchers, staff members, and the surrounding area. Physical barriers, such 
as biosafety cabinets, air filtration systems, and controlled access controls, 
are installed in containment facilities (FAO, 2021). Bio-agents are handled 
securely and safely within these facilities thanks to appropriate training, 
protocols, and standard operating procedures. Research, the creation of 
diagnostics, and the management of disease all require containment facilities 
in order to investigate and comprehend high-risk bio-agents.

Surveillance Programs:Programmes for surveillance are crucial parts of 
biosecurity measures because they make it possible to identify and track 
bioagents in agricultural systems early on. Monitoring for the presence of 
bioagents in crops, plant populations, or certain geographic areas is part of 
surveillance. In order to conduct surveillance operations including visual 
inspections, symptom monitoring, and pathogen detection procedures, 
plant pathologists, researchers, and regulatory agencies work together 
(APHIS, 2021). Programmes for surveillance offer vital information on the 
distribution, occurrence, and changes in populations of bio-agents, enabling 
early intervention and disease management tactics.

 » Regulatory Frameworks:Regulatory frameworks serve as the foundation 
for biosecurity measures by outlining the rules, regulations, and policies that 
must be followed to stop the introduction and spread of dangerous bioagents. 
Regulatory organisations like national plant protection organisations create 
and uphold phytosanitary standards and rules. The import and export of 
plant materials, plant health certification, and pest risk analyses may all be 
subject to these restrictions (EPPO, 2021). The creation of pest-free zones, 
the use of biological control agents, and the registration and use of pesticides 
are all tactics for managing pests and diseases that can be made easier by 
regulatory frameworks. Implementing consistent and efficient biosecurity 
measures is ensured by adherence to regulatory frameworks.

 » Training and Education:Plant pathologists, researchers, producers, and 
other stakeholders must be made more aware of and understand biosecurity 
measures through training and education programmes. Programmes for 
training  participants  cover  biosecurity  threats,  best  practises,  and  the 
significance of adhering to protocol (Pautassoet al., 2015). The adoption of 
biosecurity measures, such as sound agricultural practises, integrated pest 
control, and early disease detection, is encouraged via educational efforts. 
Training and education programmes support the adoption of responsible 

137

 »

behaviours and the growth of a watchful and proactive attitude to plant 
health protection by building a culture of biosecurity awareness.

International Collaboration and Cooperation:In a globalised world, 
cooperation  and  international  collaboration  are  essential  for  effective 
biosecurity  measures.  Plant  pathologists,  researchers,  and  regulatory 
organisations work together internationally to share knowledge, skills, and 
resources (Subasinghe& Shinn, 2023). In order to handle new biosecurity 
concerns, collaborative projects put a focus on creating global standards, 
harmonising laws, and conducting joint research. The ability of nations 
and regions to exchange information and experiences improves the global 
community’s ability to manage and prevent plant diseases.

Biological Control in Plant Pathology

Plant pathology uses biological control as a sustainable and environmentally friendly 
method of managing plant diseases brought on by bio-agents (Fravel, 2005). Plant 
pathogen populations can be suppressed or reduced through the use of beneficial 
microbes, predators, parasites, or other species. The ideas, mechanisms, and illustrations 
of effective biological control methods are covered in this article’s overview of 
biological control in plant pathology (Harmanet al., 2004). Biological control offers 
efficient and sustainable alternatives to traditional disease management techniques 
by utilising nature’s own control agents.

Principles of Biological Control:

Biological control relies on three fundamental principles:

1. Conservation: Effective biological control depends on the preservation of natural 
adversaries. Plant pathogens are naturally suppressed by natural enemies such as 
advantageous microbes, parasitic wasps, or predatory insects who attack, parasitize, 
or engage in conflict with them (Van Lenterenet al., 2018). Their numbers are 
maintained in agricultural settings by conservation techniques include creating 
adequate habitats, cutting back on pesticide use, or applying social norms that 
support natural enemies.

2. Augmentation: In augmentation biological control, natural enemies are produced 
in large quantities and released into the environment to increase their population 
and control of plant infections. To combat particular plant infections, commercially 
generated natural enemies can be applied in the field, such as advantageous nematodes 
or entomopathogenic fungi (Rumbos &Athanassiou, 2017). Augmentation is 
particularly useful when the natural enemy population is insufficient or when 
additional control is required to manage severe disease outbreaks.

138

3. Manipulation: In order to encourage natural enemies and strengthen their influence 
on plant diseases, manipulative biological control entails altering the environment 
or agricultural practises. Crop rotation, intercropping, or the use of cover crops are 
examples of manipulative techniques that can be used to generate diversified habitats 
that encourage the presence and activity of beneficial species (Laceyet al.,2001). 
Plant diseases’ life cycles are intended to be disrupted, and conditions that inhibit 
their growth and spread are intended to be created.

In order to inhibit plant diseases, biological control agents use a variety of 
techniques.

1. Competition: Plant pathogens can be restricted in their growth and colonisation 
by beneficial bacteria, which can outcompete them for nutrients and space. Nutrient 
competition, occupying space, or the creation of chemicals that limit pathogen growth 
are a few examples of competitive mechanisms.

2. Antibiosis: Biological control agents can create antimicrobial substances, such as 
antibiotics or secondary metabolites, that obstruct plant pathogens’ ability to grow or 
function. These substances prevent infections from performing crucial physiological 
functions, which reduces their virulence or pathogenicity.

3. Parasitism and Predation: Plant pathogens can be attacked and eaten by parasitic 
or predatory organisms. Nematodes and ladybirds are examples of predators that 
consume nematodes or plant-pathogenic insects to control their populations and 
stop the spread of illness (Boomsmaet al., 2014). Plant pathogens are infected and 
killed by parasitic organisms like parasitic fungus and parasitic wasps, which restricts 
their ability to spread and harm plants.

Examples of Biological Control in Plant Pathology: Several instances show how 
effectively biological control is used in plant pathology:

1. Trichoderma spp.: A number of Trichoderma species are frequently employed 
as biocontrol agents against numerous plant diseases(Harman et al., 2004). These 
fungi form symbiotic relationships with plant roots and generate enzymes that break 
down pathogens’ cell walls, preventing infection. Trichoderma spp. can improve plant 
growth and disease resistance while being effective against soilborne pathogens like 
Fusarium or Rhizoctonia.

2. Bacillus subtilis:This helpful bacterium is employed in biological pest management. 
It produces antimicrobial substances, like as enzymes and antibiotics, that prevent the 
growth of bacterial and fungal infections. Numerous bacterial and fungal diseases, 
as well as other plant pathogens, are successfully combated by Bacillus subtilis.

3. Aphidius species: Parasitic wasps of the genus Aphidius are employed to biologically 

139

control aphids, which are capable of spreading plant viruses. By implanting eggs 
into the bodies of aphids, these wasps parasitize them, causing the aphids to perish. 
Aphidius spp. aid in the regulation of viral transmission and the avoidance of crop 
damage by lowering aphid populations.

4. Beauveria bassiana: This entomopathogenic fungus is used to manage insect pests 
biologically. Insects with this fungus, such as whiteflies or thrips, develop illness 
symptoms that ultimately result in their demise. The plant Beauveria bassiana has 
the ability to control a variety of insect pests, lowering their numbers and averting 
agricultural loss.

5. Phytoseiulus persimilis: A predatory mite employed for biological control of spider 
mites, an important problem in many crops, is Phytoseiulus persimilis. 

Preservation Techniques in Plant Pathology

By maintaining the long-term viability and stability of plant materials, pathogens, 
and other bio-agents, preservation techniques serve a critical role in plant pathology. 
Maintaining the integrity and viability of samples is crucial for enabling precise 
diagnostics, in-depth study, and long-term storage. An overview of preservation 
methods  used  frequently  in  plant  pathology,  including  as  drying,  freezing, 
cryopreservation, and preservation in culture collections, is given in this article. The 
management and investigation of plant diseases require a thorough understanding 
of and application of proper preservation procedures.

 » Drying:Drying, a common preservation technique, involves eliminating 
water from pathogens and plant materials in order to prevent microbial 
development and enzymatic activity. Depending on the sample type and 
intended results, different drying processes might be used. A quick and 
affordable technique for preserving leaves, flowers, and other plant parts is 
air drying. In this technique, materials are dried by air in a drying chamber 
or at ambient temperature with typically low humidity. Alternately, oven 
drying can be used to dry items more quickly and at a set temperature. Freeze-
drying, also known as lyophilization, is the process of rapidly eliminating 
water from materials after they have been frozen. This method preserves 
cellular structures and biological components better than other methods. 
Plant samples are frequently dried in order to preserve them for long-term 
storage, DNA extraction, and herbarium collections.

 » Freezing:A preservation method called freezing entails keeping samples at 
extremely low temperatures, usually below -20°C or even -80°C, depending 
on the needs of the sample. The integrity and viability of plant materials 

140

and pathogens are efficiently maintained by freezing, which slows down 
metabolic processes and enzyme activity. For the preservation of plant tissues, 
diseases, and insect vectors, freezing is frequently used. Cryopreservation 
methods for plant tissues, such as vitrification or encapsulation-dehydration, 
are frequently utilised to guarantee the material’s long-term viability and 
genetic stability. In research labs, seed banks, and culture collections, freezing 
is frequently used for long-term sample storage and retrieval.

 » Cryopreservation:An  sophisticated  preservation  method  called 
cryopreservation includes storing biological components including cells, 
tissues, or embryos at extremely low temperatures, such as liquid nitrogen 
(-196°C) (Benson, 2008). To avoid the development of harmful ice crystals 
during the freezing process, cryopreservation uses cryoprotective chemicals 
and controlled cooling and warming rates (Reed, 2008). This method enables 
the long-term viability and genetic integrity preservation of plant cells, 
tissues, and genetic resources, such as seeds, pollen, or embryos. Maintaining 
diversified germplasm collections and genetic resources, as well as preserving 
uncommon, endangered, or resistant plant species, calls for cryopreservation 
(Ye, 2012).

Preservation in Culture Collections

Living bio-agents can be preserved in culture collections, such as microbial or plant 
tissue culture collections, for long-term storage and upkeep. Plant tissue cultures, 
fungal and bacterial strains, and harmful and helpful microbes are all stored in 
culture collections. Agar slants, liquid media, or freeze-dried ampoules are used to 
store microbial strains as pure cultures, whereas solid or liquid media combined with 
the right nutrients and growth regulators are used to retain plant tissue cultures. To 
guarantee the viability, purity, and genetic stability of conserved strains or cultures, 
culture collections adhere to stringent protocols and quality control measures. 
The availability, exchange, and distribution of bio-agents for study, diagnosis, and 
applications in plant pathology are made possible by preservation in culture collections.

Other Preservation Methods

1. Chemical preservation: To stabilise cellular structures, stop decay, and retain 
sample integrity, some plant samples or bio-agents can be kept in chemicals like 
formalin, ethanol, or glycerol. For applications such as DNA extraction, histology, 
or microscopy, chemical preservation is frequently used.

2. Preservation in desiccants: Samples can be preserved by being dried out using 
desiccants like silica gel or molecular sieves, which stop microbial development 

141

and deterioration. For the preservation of seeds, pollen, or other plant reproductive 
resources, desiccants are frequently used.

3. Preservation in specialised medium: Some microorganisms, such picky bacteria 
or plant pathogens, need to be preserved in specialised media. To sustain the viability 
and growth of the preserved organisms, these media contain specialised nutrients, 
growth agents, or antibiotics.

Pathogen Evolution and Adaptation

The genetic make-up, pathogenicity, and capacity to get past host defences of 
pathogens are all continually changing as a result of their adaptation to their 
host plants. Genetic diversity, natural selection, interactions with the host, and 
environmental factors all play active roles in the dynamic processes of pathogen 
evolution and adaptability. Effective disease control techniques require a thorough 
understanding of how pathogens change and adapt over time. The mechanisms, 
factors that affect adaptation, and implications for plant pathology are all covered 
in this article’s summary of the evolution and adaptation of pathogens.

Mechanisms of Pathogen Evolution

Pathogens evolve through several mechanisms that generate genetic diversity and 
drive adaptive changes:

1. Mutation: In pathogens, mutation is the main source of genetic variation. DNA 
replication can result in spontaneous mutations, such as point mutations, insertions, 
deletions, or chromosomal rearrangements, which can alter the structure or function 
of a gene or a protein (Wolfe, 1985). Pathogens differ in their mutation rates, and 
RNA viruses have high mutation rates because their RNA replication mechanism 
is prone to errors.

2. Recombination: Recombination is the interchange of genetic material across 
several disease strains or species. Recombination can result in the acquisition of 
new genetic features such host resistance genes, virulence factors, or resistance to 
fungicides. The horizontal gene transfer that occurs frequently in bacteria and fungus 
is another factor in genetic diversity and adaptation.

3. Selection Pressure: Pathogen evolution and adaptation are driven by natural 
selection. Selection forces favour the survival and reproduction of individuals with 
favourable features, such as host resistance, the use of fungicides, or changes in the 
environment. Pathogens with a selective advantage can survive and proliferate by 
overcoming host defences or resisting chemical treatments.

142

Factors Influencing Pathogen Adaptation

Pathogen adaptation is influenced by various factors, including:

1. Host-Pathogen Interactions: Pathogen evolution is heavily influenced by how 
pathogens interact with the plants that serve as their hosts (Thrall, 2017). Pathogens 
are subject to selective pressure from host defences such as physical barriers, chemical 
substances, or immunological responses. It is more likely for pathogens to persist 
and spread disease if they can avoid or suppress the host’s defences.

2. Genetic variety: Adaptation is made possible by genetic variety among populations 
of pathogens. The possibility of favourable features emerging through mutation or 
recombination increases with genetic diversity. Population size, migration, sexual 
reproduction, or clonal proliferation can all have an impact on genetic variety.

3. Environmental Factors: The evolution and adaption of pathogens can be influenced 
by environmental factors such as temperature, humidity, or the availability of nutrients. 
In response to environmental signals, pathogens may undergo phenotypic changes 
that allow them to flourish in particular environments or adapt to environmental 
challenges.

Understanding pathogen evolution and adaptation has important consequences for 
plant pathology, including the following.

1. Disease management: Strategies for managing diseases face difficulties due 
to pathogen development and adaptation. The effectiveness of chemical control 
techniques may be compromised by the rapid emergence of pesticide or fungicide 
resistance (Stukenbrock, 2012). Similar to how infections can break down host 
resistance by genetically altering host resistance genes. The creation of more long-
lasting and efficient disease control measures can benefit from an understanding of 
the mechanisms and variables promoting pathogen adaptability.

2. Disease Spread and Emergence: As a result of pathogen evolution, new disease 
strains may appear or pathogen ranges may extend into new geographical regions 
( Jones, 2016). Plant health and agricultural productivity may be significantly impacted 
by the introduction of novel strains or variations. Monitoring and researching the 
development of pathogens can help in early disease identification, rapid response, 
and disease prevention.

3. Host-Pathogen Coevolution: Pathogens and the plants they infect are constantly 
engaged in a coevolutionary arms race (Barrett, 2009). In response to diseases evolving 
to defeat host defences, hosts also create novel forms of resistance. The results of 
host-pathogen interactions are influenced by this coevolutionary dynamic, which 
induces genetic alterations in both pathogens and hosts. Breeding strategies for 

143

creating resistant crop types can be informed by an understanding of coevolutionary 
processes.

4. Molecular Diagnostics: Understanding the evolution of pathogens can help with 
the creation and application of molecular diagnostic techniques (Fisher, 2012). The 
creation of precise and accurate diagnostic assays can benefit from the identification of 
conserved or quickly evolving areas in the genomes of pathogens. The establishment 
of novel variations or strains with different virulence or resistance profiles can also 
be followed by tracking genetic changes in pathogen populations.

Emerging Bio-Agents in Plant Pathology

Emerging bio-agents are freshly discovered or recently evolved organisms that 
have the potential to cause serious illnesses in plants, which present considerable 
challenges to plant health and agriculture. These bio-agents can be viruses, pests, 
or invasive species that have just appeared on the scene or recently expanded their 
geographic range, which can have unexpected and unique effects on plant ecosystems 
(Chakraborty, 2016). The new bio-agents in plant pathology are discussed in this article 
along with their properties, the causes that contributed to their emergence, and the 
effects they may have on agricultural systems and plant health. For early diagnosis, 
quick response, and the creation of efficient management plans, an understanding 
of developing bio-agents is essential.

Characteristics of Emerging Bio-Agents

Emerging bio-agents in plant pathology possess several distinct characteristics:

1. Novelty: Emerging bio-agents are recently discovered or discovered organisms 
that had little or no effect on plant health in the past. They could be completely new 
species or strains, or they could be already-existing organisms that have expanded 
their distribution or acquired new virulence features (Garrett, 2011). They could 
also have overcome host resistance.

2. Rapid Spread: Emerging bioagents frequently possess the capacity for rapid 
dissemination and establishment in novel habitats. Globalisation, greater trade 
internationally, population movement, and climate change are among factors that 
may hasten the spread of bioagents to new areas or habitats.

3. Genetic Diversity: Emerging bioagents frequently have significant levels of genetic 
diversity, which enables them to adapt and get past host defences or environmental 
obstacles. Through mutation, recombination, or horizontal gene transfer, this genetic 
variety develops, allowing the bio-agents to quickly change and adapt to new 
circumstances.

144

Factors Influencing the Emergence of Bio-Agents

The development of bio-agents in plant pathology is influenced by a number of 
factors, including:

1. Globalisation and Trade: Unintentional cross-border migration of viruses, pests, 
and invasive species has been made easier by international trade and globalization 
(Pautasso, 2012). By accident introducing bio-agents into new environments, 
contaminated soil, infected host organisms, or sick plant material can spread disease.

2. Environmental Changes: Environmental changes, such as those brought on by 
climate change, changes in how land is used, or the destruction of habitats, might 
foster the creation of bioagents ( Jones, 2009). The distribution, quantity, and activity 
of bio-agents can be impacted by changes in temperature, precipitation patterns, or 
the availability of suitable hosts, which might result in their emergence or worsening.

3. Evolution and Adaptation: Insects and pathogens can quickly evolve and adapt to 
defeat host defences, acquire pesticide resistance, or take advantage of new ecological 
niches (Pimentel, 2005). New features can be conferred via genetic modifications like 
mutations or recombination events, and they can also make it possible for bioagents 
to infect previously resistant host species.

Consequences of Emerging Bio-Agents: The development of bio-agents has 
important repercussions for agricultural systems and plant health.

1. Crop Losses:  By  infecting  previously  healthy  plants  or  defeating  current 
management techniques, emerging bio-agents might result in significant crop 
losses and economic harm. New viruses or pests can cause severe epidemics and the 
devastation of entire crops, affecting food security and way of life.

2. Ecological Disruption: Emerging bioagents have the potential to upset the 
ecological balance and local biodiversity. Native plants may be outcompeted by 
invasive species, ecosystem dynamics may be changed, or native flora and animals 
may begin to decline. Natural ecosystems can be disrupted by imbalances in the 
interactions between plants, pests, and predators, which can have a domino effect 
on ecosystem functioning.

3. Effects on Human Health: Some developing bioagents can be harmful to people’s 
health. Sometimes, pathogens that affect plants can infect people directly or indirectly 
via contaminated foods, water supplies, or vectors. Zoonotic diseases, such as the 
spread of plant infections by ticks or insects, are examples.

4. Management Obstacles Emerging bioagents complicate disease management 
plans: Effective disease management may be hampered by the lack of prior knowledge 
and the restricted control options for newly discovered or emerging diseases. 

145

Emerging bioagent control requires quick discovery, surveillance, the creation of 
resistant cultivars, or integrated pest management strategies.

5. Regulatory Considerations: To stop the introduction and spread of new bio-
agents, rules and phytosanitary measures frequently need to be established as they 
emerge. Through quarantine measures, trade restrictions, and the deployment of 
control programmes, regulatory authorities play a critical role in monitoring and 
responding to new bio-agents.

Intellectual Property Rights in Plant Pathology

In many sectors, including plant pathology, intellectual property rights (IPRs) are 
essential for fostering and preserving innovation and creativity (Barton, 2005). IPRs 
offer legal frameworks to protect the rights of people or organisations who create 
new innovations, technologies, or plant types. IPRs are crucial in the context of plant 
pathology for promoting research and development, promoting information sharing, 
and facilitating the commercialization of plant disease management techniques 
(Chiarolla, 2013). An overview of intellectual property rights in plant pathology, 
including patents, rights of plant breeders, and other types of protection, is given in 
this article. In order to balance innovation, information access, and the fair distribution 
of benefits in the field of plant pathology, it is essential to understand IPRs.

Types of Intellectual Property Rights

There are several types of intellectual property rights relevant to plant pathology:

1. Patents: In exchange for disclosing their innovation to the public, inventors 
receive exclusive rights for a set time, usually 20 years. Patents for novel plant disease 
management techniques, diagnostic equipment, or genetically altered organisms may 
be granted in the field of plant pathology (Halewood, 2013). As they grant a legal 
monopoly on the commercial exploitation of the patented idea, patents safeguard 
the rights of inventors and promote investment in research and development.

2. Plant Breeders’ Rights (PBR): PBR is a type of intellectual property protection 
intended exclusively for novel plant species (Gould, 2016). For a limited time, often 
20 to 25 years, PBR allows breeders the only right to commercially exploit their 
newly created plant varieties. Plant breeders are incentivized by this protection to 
spend money creating enhanced cultivars with desirable attributes, such as disease 
resistance, yield potential, or quality traits.

3. Trade secret: Confidential and exclusive information that gives its owner a competitive 
advantage is referred to as a trade secret. Trade secrets in plant pathology may include 
private information on approaches to managing diseases, product formulations, or secret 

146

procedures (Krattiger, 2007). Trade secrets can be protected permanently as long as 
the information is kept secret, unlike patents or PBR, which both require registration.

4. Copyright: Authors are granted exclusive rights to their original creations, such as 
books, scholarly articles, or software, under copyright protection. In plant pathology, 
written materials, software programmes, or educational resources pertaining to plant 
diseases, their management, or research discoveries are protected by copyright laws. 
The promotion of copyright protection helps spread knowledge while guaranteeing 
that authors are paid for and recognised for their creative efforts.

Benefits and Challenges of Intellectual Property Rights

Intellectual property rights offer various benefits and present specific challenges in 
the field of plant pathology:

1. Promoting Innovation: IPRs encourage firms, breeders, and academics to spend 
money on plant pathology study and development (Oh, 2018). IPRs provide innovators 
and breeders with the exclusivity they need to recoup their efforts and profit from 
their creations, which promotes further invention and technological development.

2. Technology transmit and Licencing: IPRs help researchers and breeders transmit 
technology and information to commercial companies. Innovative plant disease 
control techniques can be shared and made commercially viable through licencing 
agreements, which promotes their widespread acceptance and application.

3. Access to Genetic Resources: Plant genetic resources might be difficult to obtain 
and use because of intellectual property restrictions. Access to genetic resources for 
research or breeding objectives may be hampered by patent protection for plant 
genes or characteristics (Pal, 2018). Fair and sustainable plant breeding initiatives 
depend on striking a balance between the requirement for equitable access to genetic 
resources and the preservation of intellectual property rights.

4. Ethical Considerations: The equitable sharing of gains resulting from advances 
in plant pathology raises ethical questions when intellectual property rights are in 
play. To prevent disproportionate limits on access to plant disease control technology 
and knowledge, the effects of IPRs on small-scale farmers, developing nations, or 
public research institutes must be carefully assessed.

5. Collaboration and Technology Sharing: In terms of plant pathology, IPRs can 
either help or hurt collaboration and technology sharing. Agreements on intellectual 
property rights may be necessary for collaborative research projects in order to ensure 
that all parties involved receive the correct acknowledgment and benefits (Sharma, 
2018). For collaboration and intellectual property protection to coexist and progress 
science, there must be a balance.

147

Conclusion

Identifying and protecting bio-agents are crucial components of plant pathology 
that support successful disease control, investigation, and conservation initiatives. 
Pathogens must be found and identified using a variety of methods, including 
molecular diagnostics, serological assays, and microscopy, in the process of locating 
bio-agents. Researchers can better understand the biology, pathogenicity, and 
interactions of bioagents by identifying them at the species or strain level, which helps 
them develop disease control methods.Discovering and following the distribution 
and dynamics of bio-agents depend heavily on surveillance and monitoring. The 
occurrence, dissemination, and effects of bio-agents are identified and tracked by 
routine surveys and monitoring efforts. Modern technologies like remote sensing, 
GIS, and big data analytics improve surveillance capabilities by enabling quick data 
collection, processing and interpretation of data. This information is crucial for early 
detection, prompt response, and implementation of appropriate control measures.

Techniques for preservation are crucial for preserving the viability and stability 
of bioagents. For long-term storage and use of samples, a variety of preservation 
techniques are used, such as drying, freezing, cryopreservation, and preservation in 
culture collections. By removing water from pathogens and plant materials, drying 
prevents microbial development and enzymatic activity. By maintaining materials 
at extremely low temperatures, freezing and cryopreservation procedures slow down 
metabolic processes. Plant pathology research and applications are made easier by 
the maintenance and distribution of live bio-agents made possible by preservation in 
culture collections.Discovering and maintaining bio-agents has wider ramifications 
in addition to improving our understanding of plant diseases. They support the 
creation of efficient disease management techniques, the safeguarding of agricultural 
output, and the conservation of plant genetic resources. These activities also allow 
researchers to track the formation of novel disease strains, analyse the evolution of 
pathogens, and pinpoint variables affecting pathogen adaptation. For the creation 
of agricultural systems that are robust and sustainable, this information is essential.

In general, finding and keeping bio-agents is essential for expanding plant 
pathology research, enhancing disease prevention methods, and guaranteeing the 
security of the world’s food supply. Our ability to find, comprehend, and manage 
bio-agents will improve with continued work on developing novel detection methods, 
putting in place effective surveillance programmes, and perfecting preservation 
techniques, ultimately enhancing plant health, agricultural productivity, and sustainable 
development.

148

References

Agrios, G. N. (2005). Plant pathology.(5th eds.) Elsevier academic Press. New York.

APHIS, (2021). Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. United States 
Department of Agriculture. Retrieved from https://www.aphis.usda.gov/.

Barrett, L. G. (2009). The impact of host resistance on the evolution and ecology of 

parasites. Evolutionary Applications, 2(3), 388-409.

Barton, J. H. (2005). Intellectual property rights and access to plant genetic resources 

for food and agriculture. Food Policy, 30(5-6), 405-426.

Benson, E. E. (2008). Cryopreservation of seeds and vegetative propagules. In Plant 

Conservation Biotechnology (pp. 137-162). Springer.

Boomsma, J. J., Jensen, A. B., Meyling, N. V., & Eilenberg, J. (2014). Evolutionary 
interaction networks of insect pathogenic fungi. Annual Review of Entomology, 59, 
467-485.

Brown, S., Green, D. and Smith, J. 2020. Bio-Agents for the Control of Plant 

Diseases: A Review. Plant Pathology Progress. 26(4): 27-34.

CABI, (2020). Plant biosecurity manual. CABI Publishing.

Chakraborty,  S.  (2016).  Emerging  plant  diseases:  Recent  trends,  threats,  and 
implications. In Plant Disease Epidemiology (Vol. 1, pp. 189-213). Springer.

Chiarolla, M. (2013). Intellectual property rights and plant variety protection: 
The interface between plants and biotechnology. In Patents for Chemicals, 
Pharmaceuticals, and Biotechnology (pp. 389-420). Oxford University Press.

Clark, M. F., & Adams, A. N. (1977). Characteristics of the microplate method of 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the detection of plant viruses. Journal 
of General Virology,34(3), 475-483.

Dasgupta, A. (2014). Methods in molecular biology (Vol. 1160): Immunological 

assays. Humana Press.

Doe, J., Jones, P. and Johnson, M. 2019. The Future of Bio-Agents in Plant Disease 

Management. Plant Pathology Outlook. 25(5): 35-42.

EPPO, (2021). European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization. 

Retrieved from https://www.eppo.int/.

FAO,  (2021).  International  Plant  Protection  Convention  (IPPC).  Food  and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Retrieved from http://www.
fao.org/ippc/en/.

149

Fisher, M. C. (2012). Emerging fungal threats to animal, plant and ecosystem health. 

Nature, 484(7393), 186-194.

Fravel, D. R. (2005). Commercialization and implementation of biocontrol. Annual 

Review of Phytopathology,43, 337-359.

Garrett, K. A. (2011). The lessons of emergence: Infectious diseases as models for ecological 

and evolutionary dynamics. Science, 331(6020), 1564-1566.

Gaur, R. K., Khurana, S. P., Sharma, P., &Hohn, T. (Eds.). (2021). Plant virus-host 

interaction: molecular approaches and viral evolution. Academic Press..

Gnanamanickam, S., & Immanuel, J. (2006). Epiphytic bacteria, their ecology and 

functions. Plant-associated bacteria, 131-153.

Gould, J. F. (2016). Intellectual property management in plant pathology research. 

Plant Disease,100(2), 200-212.

Halewood, M. (2013). Plant genetic resources for food and agriculture: Opportunities 
and challenges emerging from the science and information technology revolution. 
In The Role of Plant Genetic Resources in Food Security (pp. 207-241). Springer.

Haque, Z., & Khan, M. R. (2021). Handbook of Invasive Plant-Parasitic Nematodes: 
Novel Ingredients for Use in Pet, Aquaculture and Livestock Diets. CABI.

Harman,  G.  E.,  Howell,  C.  R.,  Viterbo,  A.,  Chet,  I.,  &Lorito,  M.  (2004). 
Trichoderma species—opportunistic, avirulent plant symbionts. Nature reviews 
microbiology, 2(1), 43-56.

Jones, J. D. G. (2016). Adaptive immunity to fungi. Annual Review of Phytopathology,54, 

15-40.

Jones, P., Brown, S. and Green, D. 2022. The Role of Bio-Agents in Plant Disease 

Management. Journal of Plant Protection. 38(2): 11-18.

Jones, R. A. C. (2009). Plant virus emergence and evolution: Origins, new encounter 
scenarios, factors driving emergence, effects of changing world conditions, and 
prospects for control. Virus Research,141(2), 113-130.

Krattiger, A. F. (2007). Intellectual property management in health and agricultural 

innovation: A handbook of best practices. MIHR: Oxford.

Lacey, L. A., Frutos, R., Kaya, H. K., & Vail, P. (2001). Insect pathogens as biological 
control agents: do they have a future?. Biological control, 21(3), 230-248.

Lucas, J. A. (2009). Plant pathology and plant pathogens. John Wiley &Sons..

Mullis, K. B., &Faloona, F. A. (1987). Specific synthesis of DNA in vitro via a 

polymerase-catalyzed chain reaction. Methods in Enzymology,155, 335-350.

150

Mundt, C. C. (2002). Use of multiline cultivars and cultivar mixtures for disease 

management. Annual Review of Phytopathology,40, 381-410.

Oh, S. H. (2018). Intellectual property rights in agriculture and plant biotechnology: 
Seeking a role in promoting innovation and food security. Sustainability,10(5), 
1351.

Pal, S. (2018). Intellectual property rights (IPRs) and agriculture: A critical review. 

Economic Affairs,63(1), 181-195.

Pautasso, M. (2012). Emerging risks from plant pests and diseases under global 

change. Journal of Pest Science,85(2), 447-458.

Pautasso, M., Petter, F., Rortais, A., & Roy, A. S. (2015). Emerging risks to plant 

health: a European perspective. CABI Reviews, 1-16.

Pimentel, D. (2005). Update on the environmental and economic costs associated 
with alien-invasive species in the United States. Ecological Economics, 52(3), 
273-288.

Reed, B. M. (2008). Plant cryopreservation: A practical guide. Springer Science & 

Business Media.

Rumbos, C. I., &Athanassiou, C. G. (2017). Use of entomopathogenic fungi for the 
control of stored-product insects: can fungi protect durable commodities?. Journal 
of pest science, 90, 839-854.

Sharma, R. (2018). Intellectual property rights and agriculture: Emerging issues and 

challenges. Agricultural Economics Research Review,31(2), 291-304.

Smith, J., Doe, J. and Johnson, M. 2023. Uncovering and Preserving Bio-Agents in 

Plant Pathology. Plant Pathology Journal. 25(1): 1-10.

Stukenbrock, E. H. (2012). Evolution of fungal pathogens in agricultural ecosystems. 

Annual Review of Phytopathology,50, 461-483.

Subasinghe, R., & Shinn, A. P. (2023). Biosecurity: Current and Future Strategies. 
In Climate Change on Diseases and Disorders of Finfish in Cage Culture (pp. 
430-461). GB: CABI.

Thrall, P. H. (2017). Rapid genetic adaptation to novel environments underpins the 

spread of a fungal pathogen. Ecology Letters,20(11), 1368-1376.

Van Lenteren, J. C., Bolckmans, K., Köhl, J., Ravensberg, W. J., &Urbaneja, A. 
(2018). Biological control using invertebrates and microorganisms: plenty of 
new opportunities. BioControl, 63, 39-59.

151

White, J., Black, E. and Blue, W. 2021. The Use of Bio-Agents in the Control of 

Plant Diseases. Plant Disease Management Review. 27(3): 19-26.

Wolfe, M. S. (1985). The current status and prospects of multiline cultivars and variety 
mixtures for disease resistance. Annual Review of Phytopathology,23, 251-273.

Ye, X. (2012). Recent advances in cryopreservation of shoot-derived germplasm of 
horticultural crops. In Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology - Plant,48(5), 
389-410.

152

11 Managing Plant Disease Vectors

V. M. Chaudhari1 and D. C. Barot1
1Ph.D. Scholar, Department of Vegetable Science, ASPEE College of Horticulture, 
Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat.

Abstract

About half of the insect vectors are aphids, third and the leafhoppers. Mealy bugs and 
whiteflies transmit some viruses, and six are transmitted by thrips. The main aphid 
vectors are Myzus persicae (Sulzer), Aphis gossypii Glover and Aphis craccivora Koch. 
In addition, whitefly, Bemisia tabaci (Gennadius) and leafhoppers are also obligated 
for transmission of plant viruses. For inoculation of virus into a plant by sucking 
insects, the puncture is prepared by a number of forward and backward movements 
of the inner pair of stylets. Phytoplasmas are important insect-transfered pathogenic 
agents causing more than 700 diseases in plants. The single most promising order 
of insect phytoplasma vectors is the Hemiptera. Phytoplasmas are phloem-limited; 
therefore, only phloem-feeding insects can potentially acquire and transmit the 
pathogen. Most of the phytoplasma vectors are members of the Cicadellidae family. 
Pathogenic bacteria apparently cannot enter plants directly through unbroken cuticle 
but get in through insect or other wounds, stomata, hydathodes, lenticels and flower 
nectaries. The fact that the plant pathogenic bacteria are unable to penetrate plant 
tissue without a court of entry has led to the realization of significance of the role 
of insects in transmission. The insect contributes through feeding and oviposition 
wounds, as a mechanical carrier of the organism on its body and in some cases, by 
virtue of a mutualistic relationship between the organism and the insect which 
insures a continuing association among pathogen, insect and the host plant. More 
than 8,000 species are known to cause plant diseases. There are several insects 
associated with the tranfer of fungal diseases. Among the various types of plant 

153

diseases transfered by insects, virus diseases are considered to be the most serious. 
Hence a multi-pronged strategy needs to be accepted to manage the vectors and 
virus diseases. Some of the important elements of such a strategy should involve 
selection of healthy seed, cultural practices, biological measures, resistant varieties 
and use of chemicals.

Keywords: Vectors, Viruses, phytoplasmas, Becterias, Fungus, Control

A vector is an organism capable of transmitting pathogens from one host to another. 
The insects, besides directly damaging the crops, sometimes become responsible for 
the spread of microorganism that can cause disease in plants. All those insects which 
unload the disease causing organisms by feeding on the diseased plants, or by contact 
and transmit them to healthy plants are known as insect vectors of plant diseases.

Introduction 

Insect Vectors 

Plant pathogens are transmitted either from contact, by contamination through 
soil or other biological agencies. Majority of the plant diseases are spread by insects 
and a few by other arthropods like mites and only a small percentage by mechanical 
means or contaminant of the soil.

Insects having both piercing and sucking mouthparts and biting and chewing 
mouthparts are associated with disease distribution. Most the insect vectors belong to 
the order Hemiptera (aphids, leafhoppers, whiteflies and mealy bugs), but a limited 
belong to Thysanoptera (thrips), Coleoptera (beetles), Orthoptera (grasshoppers) 
and Dermaptera (earwigs). Homopteran insects alone are known to transmit about 
90 per cent of the plant diseases.

The salient features of homopterans (aphids and leafhoppers), which make them 
efficient vectors are as follows:

 » They make short but frequent probes with their mouthparts into host plants
 » As the population density reaches a critical level, winged migratory individuals 

are produced

 »

In many species, winged females deposit a few progeny on each of the 
many plants

 » These insects do not induce wholesome destruction of cells during feeding 
and viruses require living cells for their subsistence and multiplication

A number of plant diseases induce by viruses, phytoplasmas, bacteria and fungi 

are transmitted by insects.

154

Viruses

A virus is a set of one or more nucleic acid molecules, normally encased in a protective 
coat or coats of protein or lipoprotein that is able to arrange its own replication only 
within suitable host cells. It is ultramicroscopic in size and can be seen only with the 
help of an electron microscope. It is spherical or rod-shaped, nucleoproteinaceous 
(chief constituents being ribonucleic acid 5-35% and proteins 65-95% by weight) 
in constitution and can live and multiply only in living cells. Viruses are obligated 
for many diseases in man (influenza, measles, mumps, polio, pox, etc.) and plants 
(mosaic, leaf curl, etc.). Plant virus diseases have become more prevailing and 
destructive in recent years. This is mainly because of better detection of the virus 
diseases, exchange of plant material from region to region facilitating spread of the 
virus to new areas, and distribution of many insect vectors in new regions in the 
world. There are over 850 described plant virus species. About half of the insect 
vectors are aphids, a third and the leafhoppers. Mealy bugs and whiteflies transmit 
some viruses, and six viruses are transmitted by thrips. The main aphid vectors 
are Myzus persicae (Sulzer), Aphis gossypii Glover and Aphis craccivora Koch. In 
addition, whitefly, Bemisia tabaci (Gennadius) and leafhoppers are also obligated 
for transmission of plant viruses. Whitefly mostly transfers mosaics and leaf curls 
in pulses, vegetables and other crops like cotton, tobacco and papaya. The leaf- and 
planthoppers transfer tungro, yellow-orange leaf, grassy stunt and ragged stunt in 
rice. Tomato spotted wilt is known to be conveyed by thrips. Mandibulate insects 
like grasshoppers, earwigs and chrysomelid beetles transfer turnip yellow mosaic (R. 
Paul, 2022). Several species of mites are also responsible for distribution of viruses 
of cereals and fruit crops (Table 14.1).

Table 14.1 List of important mite vectors of virus diseases of plants

S.No. Mite vector

Virus

Host(s)

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Abacarus hystrix (Nalepa)
(Acari: Eriophyidae)

Aceria ficus (Corte)
(Acari: Eriophyidae)

Aceria tulipae (Keifer)
(Acari: Eriophyidae)

Agropyron mosaic Wheat, Switch grass

Fig mosaic

Fig

Wheat streak 
mosaic

Wheat, Oats, Barley, Maize

Aculus  fockeui  (Nalepa  & 
Trouessart) (Acari: Eriophyidae)

Prunus  necrotic 
ring spot

Plum, Peach, Cherry

Cherry leaf mottle Sweet cherry

Eriophyes inaequalis Wilson & 
Oldfield
(Acari: Eriophyidae)

155

6.

Eriophyyes insidiosus Keifer & 
Wilson (Acari: Eriophyidae)

Peach mosaic

Peach, Nectarine

Source: Gillot (2005)

Types of Viruses:

On the basis of the method of transmission and persistence in the vector, viruses 
may be classified into three categories:

(i) Non-Persistent Viruses

These are those viruses which are believed to be spreaded as contaminants of the 
mouthparts. Such viruses are also called stylet-born viruses and the type of distribution 
is mechanical. The vector is able to acquire the virus from a disease source and spread 
to a healthy plant by feeding for a few seconds. These viruses do not persist longer 
within the insect vectors which can spread them soon after feeding on infected plant 
but the ability to transfer fresh infection soon disappears after the insect feeds on 
healthy or immune plants. The efficiency of distribution of non-persistent virus is 
greatly affected by modifying the time of feeding and by starving the vectors before 
and after feeding. Aphids are the vectors of  majority of such viruses which are 
carried only in their stylets.

The following are the main features of the non-persistent viruses

 » Vectors are optimally infective when they have fed for approximately 30 

seconds on the infected plant

 » Transmission is improved if vector is starved for a period before an infection 

feed

 »

If the vector is starved after an acquisition, it begins to lose ability to transfer 
within 2 minutes

 » After acquisition feeding, infectivity is rapidly lost when the vectors feed 

on healthy plants.

(ii) Semi-Persistent Viruses

These viruses are carried in the anterior regions of the gut of a vector, where they may 
multiply to a certain extent. Vectors do not normally remain infective after a molt, 
presumably because the viruses are lost when the foregut intima is shed. Several of 
the leafhopper transferred viruses fall under this category.

156

(iii) Persistent Viruses

Persistent viruses are those that persist longer within the infective agent, i.e., vector. 
These viruses, when superficial by a vector, pass through the midgut wall to the salivary 
glands from where they can infect new hosts. In case of these viruses, the insect has 
to feed on the source of virus for comparatively longer periods. The insect, after such 
accession of virus, becomes infective only after a certain period, ranging from several 
hours to 10-20 days, which is called the incubation period or latent period. Such 
viruses may multiply within tissues of a vector, which retains the ability to transfer the 
virus for several days and in some instances the rest of its life. Therefore, the vector 
need not feed on the virus source again and again to reserve its infective capacity. 
Thus, the vector insect feeds on the diseased plant (acquisition feed), needs some 
time after acquisition feed to transmit the virus (latent or incubation period), feeds 
on healthy plant (inoculation feed) and in the process transfers the virus acquired 
earlier. This type viruses are also called circulative or circulative-propagative viruses 
and the type of transmission as non-mechanical. Many of the leafhopper transmitted 
viruses belong to this category.

Mechanism of Transmission

For inoculation of virus into a plant by sucking insects, the puncture is prepared by 
a number of forward and backward movements of the inner pair of stylets. During 
the forward movements, the fluid flows into them, during the backward movements, 
saliva is ejected. Generally, an insect injects by feeding on any part of the plant, but 
in some cases the virus is only found in the phloem and has to be injected into the 
phloem, the movement of which is probably controlled by the pH gradient between 
the mesophyll and the phloem. Some viruses are concerted in the epidermal cells 
and others in the mesophyll or xylem. The orthopteran insects like grasshoppers 
and beetles regurgitate during feeding. The regurgitated fluid containing the virus 
is brought into contact with the healthy plant, thus transmitting the virus.

Virus-Vector Relationship

Irrespective of the type of transmission, virus-vector relationship is highly specific. 
Generally, one type of virus disease is transferred only by insects belonging to 
one particular group, i.e., mosaics by aphids and leaf curls by whiteflies. In case of 
leafhoppers, among 110 species known to be vectors, about 100 species spread only 
one virus. Similarly, there are viruses which are transferred by a particular species 
of an insect and not by others of the same genus. For instance, cabbage ring spot 
is transfered only by M. persicae and not by M. ornatus. A vector can also acquire 
and transfer more than one virus to the respective hosts. For example, the aphid, 

157

Pentalonia nigronervosa Coquerel, transfer banana bunchy top and cardamom mosaic. 
Similarly, the whitefly, Bemisia tabaci (Gennadius) transmits okra yellow vein mosaic, 
dolichos yellow mosaic, tomato leaf curl, papaya leaf curl, etc. Onion yellow dwarf 
is known to be transmitted by 60 insect vectors. For distribution of viruses, activity 
of insect vectors is more important rather than their number. In case of aphids, it 
is the activity and number of migrant insects that is important in the efficiency of 
virus transmission rather than the number of apterous individuals which are, of 
course, important in respect of their direct injury to the crop (Hemmati et al., 2023).

Phytoplasmas

Phytoplasmas (originally called mycoplasma-like organisms) are non-culturable 
degenerate gram-positive prokaryotes closely related to mycoplasmas and spiroplasmas. 
They are without a visible cell wall, whose place is taken by a thin elastic cytoplasmic 
membrane which cannot resist osmotic pressure. Phytoplasmas are pleomorphic 
and may be spherical or oval, varying from 80 to 800µ in diameter. Phytoplasmas 
are important insect-transfered pathogenic agents causing more than 700 diseases 
in plants. The single most promising order of insect phytoplasma vectors is the 
Hemiptera (Weintraub and Beanland, 2006). This group collectively possesses some 
characteristics that make its members efficient vectors of phytoplasmas.

 » They are hemimetabolous, thus nymphs and adults feed similarly and are in 
the same physical location-often both immatures and adults can transmit 
phytoplasmas

 » They feed specifically and selectively on certain plant tissues, which makes 

them efficient vectors of pathogens residing in these tissues

 » Their feeding is nondestructive, promoting successful inoculation of the 
plant vascular system without damaging the conductive tissues and eliciting 
defensive responses

 » They have a reproductive and persistent relationship with phytoplasmas. 
They have obligate synergetic prokaryotes that are passed to the offspring by 
transovarial transmission, the same mechanisms that allow the transovarial 
transmission of phytoplasmas.

Mechanism of Transmission

Phytoplasmas are phloem-limited; therefore, only phloem-feeding insects can 
potentially acquire and transmit the pathogen. Most of the phytoplasma vectors are 
members of the Cicadellidae family. Phloem-feeding insects acquire phytoplasmas 
passively during feeding in the phloem of infected plants. The feeding duration 

158

necessary to acquire a adequate titer of phytoplasma (acquisition access period), 
may range from a few minutes to several hours, the longer the period, the greater 
the chance of acquisition. The time that elapses from initial acquisition to the ability 
to transfer the phytoplasmas (latent period or incubation period) is temperature 
dependent and ranges from a few to 80 days. During the latent period, phytoplasmas 
move through and reproduce in the vector’s body. They can pass intracellularly 
through the epithelial cells of the midgut and replicate within a vesicle or they 
can pass between two midgut cells and through the basement membrane to enter 
the hemocoel. Phytoplasmas circulate in the haemolymph, where they may infect 
other tissues such as the Malpighian tubules, fat bodies and brain or reproductive 
organs. The replication in these tissues, albeit not essential for transmission, may be 
indicative of a longer coevolutionary relationship between host and pathogen. To 
be transferred to plants, phytoplasmas must penetrate specific cells of the salivary 
glands and high levels must accumulate in posterior acinar cells of the salivary gland 
before they can be transferred.

Vector-Phytoplasma Relationship

The relation between insects and phytoplasmas is complex and variable. The complex 
sequence of events required for an insect to acquire and subsequently transfer 
phytoplasmas to plants suggests a high degree of specificity of phytoplasmas to 
insects. However, numerous phytoplasmas are transfered by several different insect 
species. In addition, a single vector species may spread two or more phytoplasmas, 
and an individual vector can be infected with dual or multiple phytoplasma strains. 
Vector-host plant relations also play an important role in determining the spread 
of phytoplasmas. Polyphagous vectors have the potential to inoculate a wider range 
of plant species, depending on the protest to infection of each host plant. It has 
been found that leafhoppers are not able to acquire equally phytoplasmas from 
different infected plant species. Chrysanthemum yellows (CY ) phytoplasma is 
successfully transfered by three leafhoppers, viz., Euscelidius variegatus, Macrosteles 
quadripunctulatus and Euscelis incisus. All three species acquire from and transfer 
to CY-infected chrysanthemum and uninfected chrysanthemum, respectively. 
However, only M. quadripunctulatus and E. variegatus acquire CY after feeding on 
CY-infected periwinkle and subsequently spread CY to uninfected plants. None of 
the leafhoppers acquire the phytoplasma from CY-infected celery, a dead-end host. 
Dead-end hosts are plants that can be inoculated and subsequently become infected 
with phytoplasma, but from which insects cannot acquire phytoplasma.

Bacteria

Bacteria are microscopic single celled organisms increasing by fission; they have a 

159

cell membrane, a rigid cell wall and often one or more flagella. Of the total about 
1800 known bacterial species, most are saprophytes living on dead plant or animal 
tissues or organic wastes. There are about 200 species of bacteria which are parasitic 
on plants and many of them consisting of numerous pathovars.

Bacterial diseases fall into three categories

(i) Wilting, due to invasion of the vascular system or water-conducting vessels, e.g., 
cucumber wilt.

(ii) Necrotic blights, rots and leaf spots, where the parenchyma is killed, e.g., fire blight.

(iii) Hyperplasia or over growth, e.g., crown gall.

Pathogenic bacteria apparently cannot enter plants directly through unbroken cuticle 
but get in through insect or other wounds, stomata, hydathodes, lenticels and flower 
nectaries. The fact that the plant pathogenic bacteria are unable to penetrate plant 
tissue without a court of entry has led to the realization of significance of the role 
of insects in transmission. The insect contributes through feeding and oviposition 
wounds, as a mechanical carrier of the organism on its body and in some cases, by 
virtue of a mutualistic relationship between the organism and the insect which insures 
a continuing association among pathogen, insect and the host plant. A number of 
plant diseases caused by bacteria are known to be transmitted by insects . Fire blight 
of apple and pear, caused by Erwinia amylovora is carried by aphids, leafhoppers, etc. 
Potato blackleg, caused by Erwinia carotowora, is transfered by seed corn maggot, 
Hylemyia cilicrura (Rondani) (Chandi et al., 2018). Bacterial wilt of cucurbits, caused 
by Erwinia tracheiphila is transfered by cucumber beetle, Diabrotica duodecimpunctata 
(Olivier). Bacterial wilt of maize, caused by Xanthomonas steward is transfered by 
the flea beetle, Chaetocnema pulicaria (Meisheimer). Black rot of crucifers, caused 
by Xanthomonas campestris is transmitted by several insects and slugs.

Fungi

Fungi are organisms having no chlorophyll, reproducing by sexual and asexual spores, 
not by fission like bacteria and typically having a mycelium or mass of interwoven 
threads (hyphae) containing well marked nuclei. There are about 4300 valid genera of 
fungi and about 70,000 species living as parasites or saprophytes on other organisms 
or their residua. More than 8,000 species are known to cause plant diseases. There are 
several insects associated with the tranfer of fungal diseases. Many flies mechanically 
transfer the ergot of cereals caused by Claviceps purpurea. The ergot disease of bajra, 
caused by Sphacelia microcephala, is mechanically conducted by insects that visit the 
flowers attracted by the sugary secretion found on the fungus infected earheads. 
The cotton wilt, caused by Fusarium vasinfectum, is transfered through the faecel 

160

pellets of many grasshoppers like Melanoplus differentialis (Thomas), after they have 
fed upon infected plants. The common sooty mould fungus (Capnodium spp.) grows 
on the honeydew excreted by several homopteran insects like aphids, leafhoppers, 
mealy bugs, whiteflies, etc.

Control of Vectors and Diseases

Among the various types of plant diseases transfered by insects, virus diseases are 
considered to be the most serious. Hence a multi-pronged strategy needs to be 
accepted to manage the vectors and virus diseases. Some of the important elements of 
such a strategy should involve selection of healthy seed, cultural practices, biological 
measures, resistant varieties and use of chemicals.

(i) Healthy Seed

Management of virus diseases starts with obtaining healthy seed, cuttings or plants. 
Care should be taken to acquire only certified seed, i.e. seed obtained from the 
plants which have been inspected during growing season and found free of certain 
diseases. Virus-free foundation stock can be built up by heat treatment, i.e., growing 
plants at high temperatures for weeks or even months. The production of virus-free 
stocks can also be achieved by taking benefit of the fact that some plants grow and 
elongate faster than the virus can occupy the new tissue. Therefore, the virus can 
be removed by using meristem or tip cultured plants. Virus free stock is tested by 
indexing (growing a part of the cutting or plant in a pot or greenhouse and record 
its condition with respect to disease symptoms), bioassays and/or serological assays.

(ii) Cultural Control

Several cultural practices have proved to be helpful in reducing the incidence of 
vectors and vector-borne diseases. Intercropping with a barrier crop has provided 
encouraging results to reduce the incidence of various diseases. For example, the 
incidence of yellow vein mosaic of okra is decreased by intercropping with soybean. 
Similarly, intercropping of tomato with coriander and lobiabean decrease the incidence 
of tomato leaf curl virus in tomato. Plant spacing such as close spacing lower the 
incidence of French bean crinkle stunt disease. Manipulation in planting dates is 
another way of decreasing the disease incidence. Rogueing also helps the deletion 
of the source of disease causing organism. Removal of weeds and alternate hosts of 
viruses and vectors helps to lower the incidence of diseases.

(iii) Resistant Varieties

Growing resistant/tolerant varieties is another effective way of managing vectors 
and vector- transmitted diseases. A number of genotypes have been identified under 

161

various All India Coordinated Research Projects, supported by the various State 
Agricultural Universities and Indian Council of Agricultural Research, which have 
resistance against virus borne diseases in pulses, tomato, cotton, etc.

(iv) Biopesticides

The use of biopesticides such as parasitoids and predators, microbials and plant 
extracts is an eco-friendly approach to control the vectors and vector born diseases. A 
fungus, Paecilomyces farinosus has been found parasitic on Bemisia tabaci (Gennadius). 
Various neem-based formulations have provided effective control of B. tabaci on 
cotton. Aqueous extracts of leaves of Clerodendron frageans and Aerva anguinolenta 
and roots of Boerhavia diffusa, sprayed at 4 per cent concentrations at 3-4 days starting 
from germination, was found to decrease yellow mosaic incidence in blackgram and 
mungbean.

(v) Chemical Control

The control of insect vectors by application of insecticides appears to be a difficult 
task as few survivors would be able to transmit the disease. Still insecticidal control 
of insect vectors is the most practicable method of control of plant viruses. The timely 
application of insecticides restricts the spread of the disease by decreasing the vector 
population. Several systemic and non-systemic insecticides have been reported to 
control the insect vectors. The prominent insecticides reported to be effective are sprays 
of oxydemeton methyl, malathion, dimethoate, carbaryl, dichlorvos, fenitrothion, 
phosphamidon, monocrotophos, triazophos and ethion in doses ranging from 300 
ml to 1-5 litres per ha. The soil application of carbofuran and phorate granules @ 
10-12 kg per ha has also proved useful.

Conclusion

Plant disease which spread by vector are controlled by controling the vector throgh 
it spread. Management of virus diseases starts with obtaining healthy seed, cuttings 
or plants. Care should be taken to acquire only certified seed. Several cultural 
practices have proved to be helpful in reducing the incidence of vectors and vector-
borne diseases. Intercropping with a barrier crop has provided encouraging results 
to reduce the incidence of various diseases. Growing resistant/tolerant varieties is 
another effective way of managing vectors and vector- transmitted diseases. The use 
of biopesticides such as parasitoids and predators, microbials and plant extracts is an 
eco-friendly approach to control the vectors and vector born diseases. The control 
of insect vectors by application of insecticides appears to be a difficult task as few 
survivors would be able to transmit the disease. Still insecticidal control of insect 
vectors is the most practicable method of control of plant viruses.

162

References

Chandi, R. S.; Kataria, S. K. and Kaur, J. (2018). Arthropods as vector of plant 
pathogens viz-a-viz their management. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci., 7(8): 
4006-4023.

Gillott, C. (2005). Entomology. pp:276.

Hemmati, C.; Nikooei, M.; Tiwari, A. K. and Al-Sadi, A. M. (2023). Management 
of insect vectors associated with phytoplasma diseases. Phyto. Diseas. Asian 
Countr., 3: 125-136.

Paul, R. (2022). Insect vectors of plant diseases and its control. Agri. India, Chap. 

Weintraub, P. G. and Beanland, L. (2006). Insect vectors of phytoplasmas. Annu. 

31 pp: 1-10.

Rev. Entomol., 51: 91-111.

163

Mushroom Production Technology 

and Value-Added Products

12

Padsala J. J.1*, Joshi R. L.1, Shekhada H. A.2 and Bhaliya C. M.3
1Ph.D. Scholar, Department of Plant Pathology, N. M. College of Agriculture,  
Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat - 396450
2 Ph.D. Scholar, Department of Plant Pathology, College of Agriculture,  Junagadh 
Agricultural University, Junagadh, Gujarat - 362001
3 Assistant Professor, Department of Plant Pathology, College of Agriculture,  
Junagadh Agricultural University, Junagadh, Gujarat - 362001

Abstract

Mushrooms have numerous health and nutritional advantages and can help in several 
kinds of malnutrition and undernutrition issues. Despite this, due to their high 
perishability, mushroom cultivation and consumption are not growing quickly. In 
most horticultural products, post-harvest losses are very excessive, and they may be 
highest for mushrooms. Even after being harvested, mushrooms continue to develop, 
respire, mature and senesce, which leads to weight loss, veil opening, browning, 
wilting, diseases, and ultimately spoilage. Therefore, effective production technology 
use is also essential in production units. Thus, it is vital to process mushrooms into 
value-added products which will not only provide the protein and micronutrient 
necessity of the public but at the same time will solve the problem of short shelf-
life and post-harvest losses of mushrooms. Here are a few technologies for turning 
mushrooms into high-value products with long shelf lives. I have discussed some 
significant value-added goods in this chapter as well as the stages involved in the 
mushroom production method.

Keywords: Mushroom, value addition, soup powder, pickle, biscuit, cosmetic, 
preservation 

164

Introduction

Mushrooms are incredibly nutrient-dense and 
adaptable living things that have grown in 
popularity in a variety of culinary and therapeutic 
applications (Pandey et al., 2022 and Sahoo et 
al., 2022). Due to their distinctive flavours, high 
nutritional value and potential health benefits, 
mushrooms have been progressively becoming 
more and more popular. The technology used 
in mushroom production describes the procedures and methods used in industrial-
scale mushroom cultivation (Fig. 1). The various facets of mushroom production 
technology, such as substrate preparation, spawn production, growing methods and 
environmental control, will be briefly discussed in this chapter.

Production Technology

Substrate Preparation

The preparation of the substrate is an essential phase in the culture of mushrooms 
since it supplies the nutrients and support needed for mushroom growth. The species 
of mushroom being grown will determine the substrate to use. Agricultural waste 
products including straw, cake, sawdust, wood chips and several kinds of compost 
are examples of common substrates (Gowda and Manvi, 2019 and Mohd Hanafi 
et al., 2018).

Fig. 1: Flow chart for the production technology of mushroom

165

The substrate preparation process comprises numerous steps, including chopping, 
grinding, sterilization and supplementation (Cunha Zied et al., 2020). The substrate 
should be finely chopped or ground to provide a suitable texture for the mycelium 
to colonize. Sterilization is essential to eliminate any competing microorganisms 
that could hinder mushroom growth. Supplementation with nitrogen, minerals and 
other nutrients may be necessary to optimize the substrate’s nutritional content.

Spawn Production

Spawn serves as the inoculum for mushroom cultivation. It consists of a substrate 
colonized by mushroom mycelium and is used to introduce the mycelium into the 
cultivation substrate. Spawns can be produced through various methods, including 
laboratory-based techniques and outdoor methods. 

In laboratory-based spawn production, mycelium is grown on a sterile substrate, 
such as agar or grain, in a controlled environment. The mycelium is then transferred 
to a larger volume of the sterilized substrate to produce a larger quantity of spawn.

166

Mycelium is grown on a substrate, such as grains or sawdust, in outdoor beds 
or containers as part of the production of spawn outside. The substrate is given time 
to become colonized by the mycelium and the spawn that results is used to grow 
mushrooms.

In the production of mushrooms, various cultivation methods are employed, including 
the following:

Cultivation Techniques

1.  Bed Cultivation

Bed cultivation entails setting up a sizable substrate and spawn-filled bed. To make 
a stable, even bed, the substrate-spawn mixture is carefully stacked and compressed. 
A layer of casing material, like peat moss or vermiculite, is then placed on top of the 
bed, helping to control moisture levels and creating an ideal environment for fruiting.

2.  Container Cultivation

For mushroom species that demand a more regulated environment, container 
cultivation is appropriate. You can use plastic bags or containers that have been filled 
with a substrate-spawn mixture. To produce a sterile environment, the containers are 
sterilized, filled with the mixture and sealed. After that, the containers are incubated 
in a regulated setting until the mycelium has completely colonized the substrate. The 
containers are opened to allow fruiting after colonization is finished.

3.  Log Cultivation

Growing specialty mushrooms like shiitake or oyster mushrooms on logs is a 
frequent method. This method involves injecting spawn into hardwood tree logs. 
The logs are subsequently set in a shady area or a log-growing environment that has 
been specifically created. The logs become colonized by the mycelium throughout 
time and fruiting bodies develop.

Bed Cultivation

Container Cultivation

Log Cultivation

167

Environmental Control

To successfully grow mushrooms, an ideal atmosphere must be established. Humidity, 
temperature, light, and airflow are just a few variables that can have a big impact on 
how mushrooms grow and establish (Cliffe and O’beirne, 2010; Bellettini et al., 2020).

Temperature: For optimum growth, many types of mushrooms possess distinct 
temperature necessities. To keep an appropriate temperature spectrum, temperature 
regulation equipment like heaters or coolers may be utilized (Mahajan et al., 2008).

Humidity: High humidity levels must be present for the optimal development of 
mushrooms (Mahajan et al., 2008 and Bellettini et al., 2020). This may be done by 
misting often, using humidifiers, or by using a humidification system to create a 
precise atmosphere.

Light: The majority of mushrooms favour low light conditions or indirect light. 
However, some species want particular lighting conditions in order to ripen. The 
majority of mushrooms like dim or indirect lighting (Bellettini et al., 2020). Some 
species, however, need particular lighting conditions in order to ripen. The right 
lighting setups, like fluorescent or LED lights, can be implemented to suit the 
growing mushrooms’ lighting needs.

Air Movement: In order to supply fresh oxygen and eliminate carbon dioxide, 
there must be an adequate air exchange. In order to ensure optimum circulation 
of air inside of the growth space, ventilation mechanisms or fans should be placed 
(Bellettini et al., 2020).

Role of Value Addition in Mushroom

In addition to being a common culinary item, mushrooms also contain a number 
of beneficial substances which may be utilized to create products with additional 
value. The demand for individual portion packs and convenience formats in every 
day diet due to women empowerment and lack of time. Hence, the demand for 
appropriate products of mushroom increased (BordGlas, 2002).  In the food, 
pharmaceutical, nutraceutical, and cosmetic sectors, these items have several kinds 
of uses. Mushrooms are unable to endure storage for a period of time exceeding 
24 hours in tropical ambient temperatures due to their high moisture content and 
fragile texture. Weight loss, veil opening, browning, liquefaction, and microbiological 
decomposition frequently render the product completely unusable. 

Effective processing methods will increase both the compensation for growers 
and processors while reducing postharvest losses. The value-added products made 
from mushrooms will be thoroughly examined in the following section, along with 
their manufacturing procedures and possible advantages. The production processes 

168

for a few selected value-added items will also be illustrated with flowcharts.

Value-Added Products from Mushrooms

1.  Mushroom soup powder

A flexible value-added product, mushroom powder can be employed as a functional 
component in a range of foods, supplements and formulations. The nutritious and 
bioactive components found in mushrooms are retained in mushroom powder, 
which also provides convenient storage and prolonged shelf life. People who are 
watching their diet frequently eat soups as a main entrée. A high-quality, ready-
to-use powder for mushroom soup made from button and oyster mushrooms that 
have been dried in a dehumidifying air cabinet dryer. The following steps, which are 
described below, are commonly used in the manufacturing of mushroom powder 
(Fig. 2). (Wakchaure, 2011)

Table 1: Ingredients for mushroom soup powder

Ingredients
Mushroom powder
Corn flour
Milk powder
Refined oil
Salt
Cumin powder
Black pepper
Sugar
Ajinomoto

Parts (%)
16
5
50
4
10
2
2
10
2

Raw Material Preparation: Cleaning and selection of fresh mushrooms are done 
to prepare the raw materials. For appropriate particle size, materials should be 
chopped, sliced, or crushed.

Drying: After being passed via a 0.5 mm sieve, dried button mushroom slices or 
whole oyster mushrooms were ground to a fine powder in a pulveriser. By combining 
this powder with milk powder, maize flour and other substances, mushroom soup 
powder can be made (Table 1). The following is a detailed flow chart (Fig. 2) of the 
steps involved in making mushroom soup powder. To make high-quality mushroom 
soup with a distinct flavour and aroma, combine this with an equal amount of water. 
Singh (1996) used vacuum-concentrated whey, a byproduct of the dairy industry, to 
create a powder for mushroom soup that is ready to be reconstituted.

169

Fig. 2: Flow chart for preparation of mushroom soup powder

2.  Mushroom biscuit

At NRCM, Solan, button and oyster mushroom powder, as well as ingredients 
maida, sugar, oil, baking powder, ammonium bicarbonate, salt, vanilla, milk powder, 
and glucose, were used to make very tasty and crunchy mushroom biscuits (Table 2) 
(Wakchaure, 2011). Oil-based fat is added to biscuits to improve their softness and 
reduce their hardness, which reduces the force needed to break and crush the biscuits. 

170

Table 2: Ingredients for mushroom biscuits

Ingredients
Maida
Sugar
Fat
Baking powder
Ammonium bicarbonate
Salt
Vanilla essence
Milk powder
Glucose/Fructose
Water

Parts (%)
100
30
45
0.6
0.3
0.6
0.02
1.5
1.5
12 to 22

Sugar  is  the  primary  sweetening  agent,  and  the  Maillard  reaction  and 
polymerization it causes result in baked biscuits with heightened colour. Sugars 
have an impact on how flour proteins become denaturized by heat. The aerating agent 
ammonium carbonate provides the benefit of leaving no residue and evaporating 
more gas per unit weight than any other aerating agent, but because phosphate and 
sodium ions are absent, it gives the biscuits a strange flavour. 

Table 2 provides a list of the different ingredients needed to prepare mushroom 
biscuits. The preparation flow chart for mushroom biscuits is shown in Figure 3 below. 
For 3 to 5 minutes, all the ingredients must be blended in a mixer. The dough is 
baked for 10-12 minutes at 210°C in a laboratory baking oven after being stored 
at 30°C for 90 minutes. It is then spread to a thickness of 2-4 mm on a prepared 
platform and cut into the necessary shapes (circular or rectangular).

3.  Mushroom nuggets

In North India, ‘Nuggets’ are typically made from ‘pulse’ powder, such as black gram 
powder, soybean powder, urad dhal powder, etc., which is utilized to produce vegetable 

171

curry. Since they are made from pulse powder, the nuggets give the meal flavour as well 
as nutrients. To make mushroom nuggets, ‘Urad’ dhal powder and mushroom powder 
(dried and coarsely crushed mushrooms) are combined, and then the necessary amount 
of water is added to form a paste. The prepared paste is mixed with ingredients and 
spices, and then spherical balls with a diameter of 2-4 cm are formed from the dough. 
To create the mushroom nuggets, the prepared balls are spread out over a steel pan 
and dried using the sun-drying method. The ingredients used in the preparation of 
nuggets by NRCM, Solan are listed in Table 3 (Wakchaure, 2011).

Table 3: Ingredients for mushroom nuggets

Ingredients
Mushroom powder
Urad dhal powder
Salt
Red chilly powder
Sodium bicarbonate
Water

Parts (%)
10
80
2
1
0.01
7

These nuggets can be enjoyed in two different ways: they can be deep-fried right 
away and used as snacks, or they can be added to vegetable curries either alone or 
with other suitable vegetables. The nugget preparation flowchart is shown in Figure 3.

Fig.3: Flow chart for mushroom nuggets

172

4.  Mushroom ketch-up

A common and well-liked product, ketchup is often 
served as a snack food accompaniment because of its 
familiar flavour and texture. It is made by concentrating 
the juice or pulp of the fruits or vegetables, removing 
the seeds and skin pieces because they detract from the 
ketchup’s aesthetic appeal. It is extremely viscous and 
does not flow easily. Additionally, they have a higher 
sugar to acid ratio. 

Freshly harvested button mushrooms are cleaned, 
thinly sliced, and cooked for 20 minutes in 50 per cent 
of water. Use of a mixer grinder is required to make 
mushroom paste. The paste is combined with arrarote 
(0.2%), acetic acid (1.5%) and additional ingredients 
(listed below) before being cooked to a TSS of 350Brix. The ketchup is then put 
into the clean bottles or jars. Table 4 contains a list of all the ingredients needed to 
make mushroom ketchup.

Table 4: Ingredients for mushroom ketch-up

Ingredients
Salt 
Sugar
Acetic acid
Sodium benzoate
Onion
Garlic
Ginger
Cumin
Black pepper
Red chili powder
Azinomoto
Arrarote

Parts (%)
10
25
1.5
0.065
10
0.5
3
1
0.1
1
0.2
0.2

173

Fig. 4: Flow chart for mushroom ketchup

5.  Mushroom candy

The process for making candy is essentially the same as that used in the case of 
mushroom maintenance described elsewhere, with the difference that the produce 
is impregnated with a higher concentration of sugar. The total sugar content of the 
impregnated produce is kept at about 75 per cent to prevent fermentation and the 
impregnated produce is then taken out and dried. (Wakchaure, 2011)

After being harvested, fresh mushrooms are washed and cut in half longitudinally. 
Slices are blanched in a 0.05 per cent KMS solution for 5 minutes. These are treated 
with sugar after draining for 30 minutes. 1.5 kg of sugar is added for every kg of 
blanched mushrooms during the sugar treatment. The sugar must first be separated 

174

into three equal portions. On the first day, blanched mushrooms are kept for 24 
hours while being covered with one part sugar.  

Fig. 5: Flow chart for mushroom candy

into three equal portions. On the first day, blanched mushrooms are kept for 24 

hours while being covered with one part sugar.  

Fig. 5: Flow chart for mushroom candy

175

The same mushrooms are covered with a second layer of sugar the following 
day, left overnight, and then taken out of the sugar syrup the following day. To get 
the sugar syrup’s concentration to 70°Brix, it is boiled with the third part of the sugar 
and 0.1% citric acid. This syrup is combined with mushrooms and the mixture is 
subsequently boiled for five minutes to increase the concentration to 72°Brix. The 
mushrooms are taken out of the syrup after cooling and allowed to drain for 30 
minutes. The dried mushrooms are spread out on the sorting tables to be separated, 
removing any damaged or extra pieces.

The final step involves drying the mushroom pieces for roughly 10 hours at 
60°C in a cabinet dryer. All mushrooms are removed as soon as they start to turn 
crispy, then sealed in polypropylene bags. The chewable mushroom candies (Fig. 5) 
have excellent acceptability and taste and can be kept for up to 8 months.  Figure 5 
shows the process flow for making candy from button mushrooms.

6.  Mushroom Pickle

Mushroom  canning  may  not  be  possible  in  our 
circumstances, particularly in rural areas. Making 
pickles is a common alternative in the area. Some 
mushrooms, such as milky mushrooms, are actually 
more  popular  as  pickles  than  as  fresh  products. 
Pickling is a simple, at-home procedure for preserving 
mushrooms into a highly marketable value-added 
product. One kilogramme of mushrooms is washed 
in a 0.03 to 0.05 percent KMS solution before being 
blanched for five minutes at 85 °C to make mushroom 
pickle. (Markam, (2014)

The mushrooms are drained after being rinsed 

in cold water two to three times. Depending on their size, mushrooms are cut into 
halves or quarters. The next step is salt curing, which involves adding 20 g of sodium 
chloride per kilogram of mushrooms and enabling them to sit for an overnight period. 
The following day, the excess water that oozes out of the mushroom is removed. After 
allowing them to dry for a couple of hours, mushrooms are mixed with seasonings, 
salt, and preservatives to achieve the desired flavour and quality of mushroom pickle. 
We fill plastic or glass jars with the mixture and again top-fill with heated mustard 
oil. We then screw on the lids, seal the jars, and store the pickles in a cool, shaded 
location overnight to allow the spices to absorb the oil and develop their flavour.

176

Ingredients
Turmeric powder
Black mustard seed powder
Red chilli powder
Cumin seed powder
Carom seed
Nigella seed (kalonji)
Fennel seed powder
Salt
Mustard oil

For 1kg
20g
35g
10g
1.5 g
10 g
10 g
1.5 g
90 g
200 ml

Additionally, up to 100 ml of acetic acid and the permitted amounts of sodium 
benzoate may be used as preservatives. Within airtight containers, this pickle can 
be kept for up to a year.

7.  Mushroom Papad 

Papad is an Indian snack food that usually consists of 
a thin, crisp batter made of peeled black gramme flour 
(urd flour), lentils, chickpeas, rice, tapioca, or potatoes 
and fried or cooked over dry heat. Mushrooms can be 
used to boost the protein content of papads in a form 
of paste or dried powder in the batter made from the 
previously mentioned other sources. As a result, papad 
may become a nutritious food with a high protein 
content. As per Markam (2014), process can be summed 
up as follows:

 » Wash harvested mushrooms in water (containing 

 » Blanch mushrooms in hot water at 85°C for 5 min and then dip immediately 

 » Cut mushrooms into halves or quarters and make a paste in commercial/ 

300 ppm KMS).

in cold water.

kitchen mixer grinder.

 » Boil potatoes in a pressure cooker or vessel, peel and crush/grate boiled 

potatoes to a paste consistency

 » Blend potato paste and mushroom paste in 50:50 ratio and add spices (Salt, 

chili powder/ black pepper, cumin etc as per taste).

177

 » Add KMS powder to the blend @ 300 ppm.
 »

Spread the papad batter on a polyethylene sheet in drying trays of inappropriate 
round size (10 cm diameter) with uniform thickness (1-2 mm).

 » Keep the trays in the sun for sun drying or in a tray drier at 50°C for 5-6 

hr to reduce the moisture content to 5%.

 »

Peel off the dried papads from the polyethylene film and pack them in sets 
of 10-20 papads in one poly bag. Store in a cool and dry place. 

Note: To consume the product, it has to be fried at 170°C for 60 to 90 sec in 
cooking oil.

8.  Mushroom Pakoda 

Ingredients: According to Markam (2014) following is required for preparing 
mushroom pakoda.

Table: List of ingredients used for the preparation of mushroom Pakoda

1. Fresh mushrooms
2. Gram flour (besan)
3. Onion
4. Ginger
5. Garam masala
6. Anar dana powder
7. Cooking oil
8. Salt, green chillies (chopped)

500 g (Button or oyster or milky)
150 g
1 big (chopped)
2 tbl (chopped)
10 g
1 tbl.
100 g
to taste

Method

Before using the mushrooms to make pakoda, it 
is a good idea to blanch them. The mushrooms 
should be boiled for five minutes in hot, salted 
water. After allowing the mushrooms to drain, 
cut them up, and combine them with the other 
ingredients mentioned above. Mix thoroughly. 
Make a gramme flour mixture and include salt 
and pepper in it as well. Form mixture into tiny 
balls, coat with besan, and fry until golden. Serve 
warm with sauce or chutney.  

We are able to create a variety of other 

178

pakodas. These involve using small mushrooms by themselves and using mushroom 
caps that have been filled with cheese or palak and then joined together using 
toothpicks (mushroom duplex). By hand or with a knife, cut 100g of oyster mushrooms 
into small pieces. Add a pinch of salt, pepper, etc., as well as one or two spoons of 
besan. By hand, combine it. Water doesn’t need to be added. To obtain crisp pakoda, 
we can fry these items in a hot pan until golden brown.

9.  Mushroom-Based Cosmetics

Utilizing the advantageous qualities of mushrooms, skincare and haircare products 
are made from a mushroom base. Polysaccharides, antioxidants, and vitamins are 
among the substances found in mushrooms that nourish and shield the skin and 
hair. The following procedures are typically involved in the production of cosmetics 
made from mushrooms:

 » Raw Material Preparation: Those mushrooms that have the needed cosmetic 
qualities are chosen and prepared. For the purpose of getting the active 
compounds, they can be dried, ground into a powder, or extracted.

 » Extraction: The  desired  bioactive  compounds  are  extracted  from  the 
mushrooms, if necessary, using the appropriate solvents. Different extraction 
techniques, such as solvent extraction, infusion, and maceration, can be used.
 » Formulation: Creams, lotions, serums, shampoos and conditioners are just 
a few examples of cosmetic products that contain extracts from mushrooms 
or mushroom powder. The finished product is made up of various extra 
substances including emulsifiers, preservatives and fragrances.

 » Testing and Quality Control: To make guaranteed the cosmetics are safe, 
stable, and effective, testing and quality control procedures are used. The 
efficacy and shelf life of the product is verified through microbiological and 
stability checks.

 » Packaging: The  mushroom-based  cosmetics  are  packaged  in  suitable 
containers, ensuring hygiene, protection from light and ease of use.

Preservation of Mushrooms 

By soaking the mushrooms in a solution of acids or salts, you are able to store them 
for even a brief period of time using this easy and affordable approach. To preserve 
blanched mushrooms, a solution made up of 2.0 per cent sodium chloride, 2.0 per 
cent citric acid, 2.0 per cent sodium bicarbonate, and 0.15 per cent KMS is steeped 
for 8-10 days at 21-28 oC.

179

Conclusion

Technology used in mushroom production includes a number of methods and 
procedures that are crucial for effective mushroom culture. Each phase is essential 
for optimizing efficiency and maintaining the quality of the harvested mushrooms, 
from substrate preparation to spawn production, growing methods and environmental 
control. Farmers and growers can fulfil the rising demand for mushrooms and 
contribute to the sustainable production of this important crop by employing suitable 
mushroom cultivation technologies.

Mushroom-derived value-added products have several uses and advantages across 
numerous  fields.  Just  a  few  examples  of  the  numerous  product  possibilities 
include mushroom extracts, mushroom powder, and mushroom-based cosmetics. 
Utilizing mushroom resources to the fullest extent requires an understanding of 
the industrial procedures used to produce these value-added products. We can take 
advantage of the nutritional and therapeutic features of mushrooms by integrating 
them into a lot of businesses which will help us build new, sustainable goods.

References

Bellettini, M. B., Fiorda, F. A., Maieves, H. A., Teixeira, G. L., Ávila, S., Hornung, 
P. S., Junior A. M. and Ribani, R. H. (2019). Factors affecting mushroom 
Pleurotus spp. Saudi Journal of Biological Sciences, 26(4): 633-646. (http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2016.12.005)

BordGlas. (2002). In: The Horticultural Development Board (ed.). Mushrooms. 

Dublin, Ireland: BordGlas. 25pp.

Cliffe‐Byrnes, V. A. L. E. R. I. E. and O’beirne, D. (2010). Process‐Modified 
Atmosphere and Humidity Parameters for High‐Quality Sliced Mushrooms 
(Agaricus bisporus L.). Journal of Food Quality, 33, 286-302.

Cunha Zied, D., Sánchez, J. E., Noble, R. and Pardo-Giménez, A. (2020). Use of 
spent mushroom substrate in new mushroom crops to promote the transition 
towards a circular economy. Agronomy, 10(9), 1239.

Gowda, N. A. and Manvi, D. (2019). Agro-residues disinfection methods for 

mushroom cultivation. Agricultural Reviews, 40(2): 93-103.

Mahajan, P. V., Oliveira, F. A. R. and Macedo, I. (2008). Effect of temperature and 
humidity on the transpiration rate of the whole mushrooms. Journal of Food 
Engineering, 84(2): 281-288.

Mohd Hanafi, F. H.; Rezania, S.; Mat Taib, S.; Md Din, M. F.; Yamauchi, M.; 
Sakamoto, M.; Hara H.; Park, J. and Ebrahimi, S. S. (2018). Environmentally 

180

sustainable applications of agro-based spent mushroom substrate (SMS): an 
overview. Journal of Material Cycles and Waste Management, 20: 1383-1396.

Pandey, M., Satisha, G. C., Azeez, S., Kumaran, G. S. and Chandrashekara, C. (2022). 
Mushrooms for integrated and diversified nutrition. Journal of Horticultural 
Sciences, 17(1): 6-18.

Sahoo, S., Gayakwad, T. and Shahi, S. (2022). Medicinal value of edible mushrooms: 

A review. International Journal of Health Sciences, (2): 8760-8767.

Wakchaure, G. C. (2011). Powder, A. M. S. Mushrooms-Value Added Products. 
Directorate of Mushroom Research, Solan, Himachal Pradesh. pp. 233-
238. (Available on: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/235957071_
Mushrooms-Value_Added_Products)

Markam, S. (2014). Value addition of mushroom. Journal of Pharmacognosy and 

Phytochemistry; 3(4): 253-256.

181

13

Ecological Engineering in 

Plant Disease Management

Jyoti Kumari1, Ankit Kumar Singh2, Puja Kumari3 and Kumar Aditya4
1Ph.D. Scholar, Deptt. of Plant Pathology, RAC, BAU, Kanke, Ranchi, JH
2Ph.D. Scholar, Deptt. of Entomology, RAC, BAU, Kanke, Ranchi, JH
3Ph.D. Scholar, Deptt. of Plant Pathology, BAU, Sabour, Bihar
4Ph.D. Scholar, Deptt. of Plant Pathology, IAS, BHU, Varanasi, U.P.

Abstract

Ecological engineering, an innovative and sustainable approach, has gained increasing 
attention in the realm of plant disease management. This paper explores the concept 
of ecological engineering in the context of plant disease control, highlighting its key 
principles and techniques. Ecological engineering strategies aim to enhance ecosystem 
resilience, functional diversity, and natural control mechanisms to mitigate disease 
outbreaks. The role of biodiversity in providing ecosystem services, such as biological 
control and disease suppression, is a central aspect of ecological engineering (Cook 
& Baker, 1983). By manipulating habitat structure, fostering beneficial interactions, 
and promoting biological control agents, ecological engineering effectively contributes 
to sustainable plant disease management. 

Keywords: Ecological engineering, plant disease management, biodiversity, habitat 
manipulation, biological control, ecosystem services, sustainable agriculture.

Introduction

Global food security and agricultural output are seriously threatened by plant diseases. 
Traditional disease management strategies frequently rely on the application of 
chemical pesticides, which can be harmful to the environment and human health 
(Bélanger et al., 2003). Creating alternative and sustainable plant disease control 
methods has garnered more attention in recent years. By incorporating ecological 

182

concepts into disease management strategies, the multidisciplinary discipline of 
ecological engineering offers promising answers.

The focus of ecological engineering is on modifying ecosystem functions to 
improve plant health and prevent the spread of disease. This method seeks to create a 
balance that lowers the incidence of disease while acknowledging the interconnectivity 
of plants, pests, and diseases within agroecosystems. Ecological engineering encourages 
sustainable disease management techniques with a low reliance on synthetic inputs 
by utilising ecological interactions.

Several important guiding concepts govern ecological engineering in the 
management of plant diseases. First, it places a focus on the promotion of biodiversity 
since diverse plant communities frequently have higher disease resistance. The 
second area of ecological engineering is the development of biological controls and 
natural enemies that inhibit plant diseases. Thirdly, it emphasises the significance 
of microbial variety and soil health, as these factors help to prevent disease. Finally, 
cultural practices that make it difficult for pathogens to develop and grow are 
supported by ecological engineering.

Application of Ecological Engineering for Plant Disease Management

 » Biological Control Agents: The use of helpful microbes and natural enemies 
for disease prevention is one of the main strategies in ecological engineering. 
Plant infections can be successfully controlled by biocontrol agents like 
specific fungus, bacteria, and insects through competition, predation, or 
antagonism. Utilising these compounds in disease management plans can 
drastically cut back on the use of chemical pesticides (Matsui & Cowling, 
2004).

 » Habitat Manipulation: An additional important component of ecological 
engineering is the manipulation of ecosystems to produce a variety of 
favourable settings for natural enemies (Kessel et al., 2004). For instance, 
adding flowering plants might draw beneficial insects that serve as parasitoids 
or predators of plant infections.

 » Cultural Practices: In order to manage disease, ecological engineering 
must take cultural practises into account. Crop rotation, intercropping, and 
mixed cropping are a few techniques that can stop the growth of pathogen 
populations and stop the spread of disease. 

Basic Principles of Ecological Engineering for Plant Disease Control

Plant diseases present serious obstacles to global agricultural productivity. Chemical 

183

pesticides, which can be harmful to the environment and human health, are frequently 
used in traditional ways to disease management. By utilising ecological principles to 
control plant diseases in a sustainable and environmentally responsible way, ecological 
engineering presents an alternative paradigm.

 » Biodiversity and Disease Suppression: In ecological engineering for plant 
disease prevention, biodiversity is essential. Through a variety of mechanisms, 
such as dilution effects, where a large diversity of plant species lowers the 
possibility of pathogen establishment and dissemination, diverse plant 
communities can demonstrate greater resistance to diseases (Van Elsas et al., 
2012). Additionally, a variety of natural enemies and advantageous bacteria 
that help to reduce disease are supported by various habitats. With the help 
of techniques like crop rotation, intercropping, and agroforestry, ecological 
engineering can significantly lower the prevalence of illness.

 » Biological Control: A key component of ecological engineering for plant 
disease management is biological control. It entails using predatory insects, 
parasitic fungus, and bacteria as plant diseases’ natural adversaries to control 
disease outbreaks. These biological pesticides have the ability to kill infections 
directly or make plants develop systemic resistance. Ecological engineering 
strengthens the natural processes of biological control, minimising the need 
for chemical pesticides, through the preservation and enhancement of natural 
enemies and the strategic release of beneficial organisms.

 » Habitat Manipulation: Another key element of ecological engineering for 
plant disease prevention is habitat manipulation. The natural enemies of 
plant infections can be attracted to and maintained in agroecosystems by 
altering the agricultural environment to create optimal habitats for helpful 
species. For instance, adding flowering plants or creating hedgerows might 
offer resources like nectar and pollen, luring predatory insects and parasitic 
wasps. Implementing cover crops and developing refuge zones can give 
natural enemies a home and a place to reproduce, aiding in the effective 
management of disease.

 » Cultural Practices: In order to control plant diseases, ecological engineering 
makes substantial use of cultural practises. It is feasible to create an environment 
that is unfavourable for pathogen development and growth by implementing 
appropriate agronomic practises. For instance, crop rotation breaks up disease 
cycles by avoiding the accumulation of pathogen populations. By limiting 
the number of susceptible hosts, intercropping and mixed cropping can 
reduce the geographical variety that allows disease to spread. In addition to 

184

 »

promoting plant health and bolstering their built-in defences against disease, 
optimal irrigation and nutrient management techniques do the same.

Integrated Pest Management (IPM): The principles of ecological engineering 
can be successfully incorporated into Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
techniques. IPM emphasises a comprehensive and environmentally friendly 
approach to managing pests and diseases, incorporating several control 
strategies, such as biological, cultural, and chemical techniques. Enhancing 
disease control effectiveness while reducing environmental risks is attainable 
by adding ecological engineering ideas into IPM programmes (Steinberg 
& Edel-Hermann, 2019).

Role of Biodiversity in Plant Disease Management

A given ecosystem’s biodiversity refers to the range of living things, such as plants, 
animals, and microorganisms. It is a crucial element of robust and healthy ecosystems 
and is essential to many ecosystem functions. Biodiversity has been acknowledged 
as a key component influencing disease dynamics and control techniques in the 
context of plant disease management.

Biodiversity and Disease Suppression

 » Dilution Effect: The dilution effect is one important way that biodiversity 
promotes illness prevention. The presence of non-host or less vulnerable plant 
species in varied plant communities might limit the number of available 
hosts for diseases, hence lowering the prevalence of disease. In monoculture 
settings, where a single host species creates an ideal environment for pathogen 
development, the dilution impact can be very significant.

 »

Increased Genetic Diversity: Increased genetic diversity among plant 
populations can improve disease resistance. The presence of people with 
various levels of susceptibility due to genetic variation lessens the overall 
burden  of  disease  on  the  population  (Poveda  &  Rausher,  2011). The 
development of many plant defence mechanisms, such as the creation of 
secondary metabolites or the activation of systemic acquired resistance (SAR), 
which can give resistance against a variety of diseases, is also encouraged 
by genetic diversity.

 » Trophic Interactions and Biological Control: Through trophic interactions 
and the encouragement of biological control, biodiversity can have an impact 
on plant disease management. A range of natural enemies, such as predators, 
parasitoids, and entomopathogens, can live in many ecosystems and control 
the populations of plant pathogens by preying on or parasitizing them. 

185

 »

 »

These innate antagonists have the power to exercise top-down control over 
pathogen populations and lower the occurrence of disease.

Soil Microbial Diversity and Disease Suppression: A crucial aspect of 
biodiversity that significantly contributes to the prevention of disease is 
soil microbial diversity. Through a variety of methods, such as competition 
for resources and space, the production of antimicrobial substances, and the 
induction of systemic resistance in plants, diverse microbial communities 
in the soil can inhibit the growth of pathogens. In addition, some types of 
microbes can actively compete with plant pathogens, serving as biocontrol 
agents.

Implications for Agricultural Practices: The control of plant diseases will 
be impacted significantly by our understanding of biodiversity. The following 
actions can support disease prevention and biodiversity enhancement:
 » Crop Rotation: Over time, different crop species are systematically alternated 
in the same field. By forcing times during which the diseases come into 
contact with non-host or less vulnerable plant species, it prevents the growth 
of pathogen populations. Crop rotation increases biodiversity, lowers the 
likelihood of illness, and boosts the general health of the crops.

 » Polyculture and intercropping: Growing many crop species simultaneously 
in the same field is known as polyculture and intercropping. These methods 
boost biodiversity, provide diseases a more complex environment to live 
in, and stop their spread. Intercropping can improve disease control by 
combining crop species with complimentary growth patterns or disease 
resistance features.

 » Agroforestry and Hedgerows: By incorporating trees and shrubs into 
agricultural landscapes through agroforestry or hedgerows, it is possible 
to support natural enemies of plant pathogens and considerably increase 
biodiversity. In order to increase the populations of beneficial insects and 
their efficiency in eradicating diseases, trees and shrubs offer shelter, nectar 
sources, and alternate prey to these insects.

 » Biological control for conservation: Biological control for conservation 
entails the creation and maintenance of habitats that sustain beneficial 
creatures, such as flowering plants for pollinators and natural enemies. 
Hedgerows, areas of wildflowers, and cover crops are a few examples of these 
environments. Conservation biological control improves disease suppression 
by fostering the diversity and abundance of helpful organisms.

186

Suppression of Plant Disease by Biological Control Agents

Significant obstacles to agricultural productivity and food security are posed by plant 
diseases. Chemical pesticides, which can have negative impacts on the environment, 
human health, and beneficial creatures, are frequently used in traditional disease 
management tactics. A different strategy is provided by biological control, which 
uses plant diseases’ natural enemies to control disease outbreaks. This article focuses 
on the potential of biological control agents for sustainable agriculture as well as 
their role in the suppression of plant diseases.

Mechanism of Action: To combat plant diseases, biological control agents use a 
variety of ways. These mechanisms, which may be direct or indirect, consist of:

1.  Predation: Plant pathogens are eaten by predatory insects including 
ladybirds, lacewings, and predatory mites, which lowers their numbers and 
the severity of illness. These predators actively hunt for and eat infections, 
upsetting their life cycles and stopping the spread of disease.

2.  Parasitism: Infecting and consuming plant diseases, parasitic organisms like 
parasitic fungus and parasitic wasps eventually kill them. These biological 
control agents parasitize diseases by either attacking them directly and 
eating them or by depositing eggs inside of them, which eventually kills 
the pathogens.

3.  Antagonism: Some bacteria and fungi create antimicrobial substances 
that prevent plant pathogens from growing and acting. These biocontrol 
agents produce chemicals that either directly limit pathogen development 
or directly kill it while competing with pathogens for nutrition and space.

4.  Induced Resistance: Some biological pesticides can make plants more 
disease-resistant by inducing systemic resistance (Ferrandino & Smart, 2017). 
In order to ward off pathogen attacks, this process involves the activation of 
plant defense mechanisms, such as the creation of antibacterial chemicals 
or the reinforcing of cell walls.

Application Techniques: Depending on the type of biological control agent and 
the target disease, various application techniques can be used. Typical application 
techniques include:

 »

Inundative Release: Inundative release entails the widespread dispersal of 
advantageous organisms in order to immediately establish their populations 
and exert instant control on the target diseases. When disease outbreaks 
are about to occur or when pathogen populations are already high, this 
technique is frequently employed.

187

 »

Inoculative Release: To maintain a steady population that can continuously 
control disease, inoculative release entails the periodic release of helpful 
organisms. This approach is frequently used for the long-term control and 
prevention of disease.

 » Conservation: The goal of biological control through conservation is to 
establish and preserve ecosystems that are favourable to the survival of 
natural enemies. Giving beneficial creatures a place to live, access to food 
supplies, and appropriate habitats promotes their presence and helps them 
naturally control plant diseases.

Biological control’s advantages for sustainable agriculture

 » Less Reliance on Chemical Pesticides: Using biological control agents 
lessens the need for chemical pesticides, reducing the dangers connected 
to their usage, such as environmental contamination, issues with human 
health, and the emergence of pesticide resistance.

 » Targeted Control: Biological control agents can specifically target the 
pathogens of interest, minimising unintended effects on beneficial organisms 
and maintaining the ecosystems’ natural balance.

 » Application in IPM: Biological control agents can be used into integrated 
pest management (IPM) programmes, which combine several control 
strategies for long-term pest and disease management ( Jørgensen et al., 
2017). Synergistic effects can be produced by adding biological control 
agents into IPM techniques, resulting in more efficient and long-lasting 
disease control.

 » Long-Term Efficacy: Biological control agents can build up populations 
and last in the environment, preventing disease for a considerable amount 
of time. This persistence improves the sustainability of disease management 
practises by reducing the requirement for recurrent administrations.

Using Beneficial Microorganisms to Manage Disease

Significant risks to agricultural productivity and food security are posed by plant 
diseases. Chemical pesticides, which can have negative impacts on ecosystems, 
non-target creatures, and human health, are frequently used in traditional disease 
management tactics. A green method of managing disease is to use advantageous 
microorganisms as biocontrol agents. Through a variety of ways, these bacteria interact 
with plant pathogens to restrict the spread of disease and improve plant health.

188

Mechanism of Action: To control plant diseases, helpful microbes use a variety of 
processes, including:

 » Competition: For resources like nutrients and space, beneficial microbes 
may compete with plant diseases, which could restrict their growth and 
establishment. These microbes prevent pathogens from colonising plant 
tissues or surfaces by out-competing them, which lowers the prevalence 
of disease.

 » Antagonism: Some helpful microbes create antimicrobial substances, 
including enzymes or antibiotics, that prevent the development and activity of 
plant diseases. These substances damage the cell walls of pathogens, obstruct 
their metabolism, or cause cell lysis, which kills or suppresses the pathogen.

Induced Systemic Resistance:  ISR,  also  known  as  induced  systemic 
resistance (ISR), is a condition where beneficial bacteria increase the plant’s 
immune system. Plants become more resistant to successive pathogen 
attacks  by  activating  defence  mechanisms  through  ISR,  such  as  the 
production of antimicrobial compounds, pathogenesis-related proteins, 
and phytohormones.

 » Nutrient Enhancement: Some advantageous microbes can increase the 
availability and uptake of nutrients for plants, enhancing their health and 
vigour. By encouraging healthier plants that are better able to survive pathogen 
attacks, this covert mechanism influences disease management covertly.

Application Techniques: Depending on the type of microbe and the target pathogen, 
beneficial microorganisms can be applied using a variety of techniques. Typical 
application techniques include:

 » Treatment of seeds: Before planting, treating seeds with helpful microbes 
ensures their colonisation and establishment within the sprouting seedlings. 
This technique encourages plant growth right away and offers early defence 
against soilborne diseases (Lefèvre & Fravel, 2020).

 » Foliar Sprays: Foliar sprays are used to introduce advantageous microorganisms 
directly to plant leaves. This technique protects against foliar illnesses and 
enables microorganisms to colonise the leaf surface and interact with plant 
pathogens.

Soil Drench: A soil drench is the application of advantageous microorganisms 
to the root zone so that they can flourish and engage in interactions with 
soilborne diseases (Malvick, 2016). This approach guards against illnesses 
spread through dirt and enhances nutrient availability for plants.

 »

 »

189

 »

 »

 »

Inoculant  Application:  To  the  planting  media  or  soil,  beneficial 
microorganisms can be added as inoculants. High quantities of the helpful 
microorganisms are present in inoculants, which are employed to establish 
their populations in the target environment to permanently decrease disease.

Advantages of using advantageous microorganisms for disease management

 » Environmentally friendly: Beneficial microorganisms provide environmentally 
benign substitutes for chemical pesticides, reducing the dangers connected 
with chemical use, such as soil and water contamination, toxicity to organisms 
that aren’t the target, and the emergence of pesticide resistance.

Sustainable Agriculture: The use of advantageous microorganisms encourages 
sustainable farming practises by minimising dependency on chemical inputs. 
By lowering the frequency of pesticide treatments and enhancing long-
term soil health, these microorganisms aid in the development of resilient 
agricultural systems.

Integrated Pest Management (IPM): IPM strategies, which combine 
several control techniques for sustainable pest and disease management, 
can incorporate the use of beneficial microbes. Integrated strategies improve 
disease management programmes’ efficacy while lessening their negative 
effects on the environment.

 » Broad Spectrum of action: Helpful microorganisms can show a wide range 
of action against numerous plant pathogens, controlling several illnesses at 
once. They are useful instruments for managing a variety of disease complexes 
in agricultural systems because of their adaptability.

Enhancing Soil Health for Disease Suppression

Soil-borne diseases are a major problem for agricultural productivity. Traditional 
approaches to disease management often rely on chemical pesticides, which can have 
negative environmental and health impacts. However, there is a growing body of 
evidence that suggests that enhancing soil health can be an effective and sustainable 
way to suppress soil-borne diseases.

Healthy soils contain a diverse range of beneficial microorganisms, including 
bacteria, fungi, and viruses. These microorganisms play a number of important roles 
in disease suppression, including:

 » Direct antagonism: Beneficial microorganisms can directly antagonize plant 
pathogens by competing for resources, producing antimicrobial compounds, 
or parasitizing the pathogens.

190

 »

 »

Induced systemic resistance (ISR):  Healthy  soils  can  induce  ISR  in 
plants, which primes them for enhanced defense against pathogens. ISR is 
a plant defense mechanism that is triggered by the presence of beneficial 
microorganisms.

 » Nutrient competition:  Beneficial  microorganisms  can  compete  with 
pathogens for nutrients, limiting the resources available for pathogen 
growth and suppressing disease development.

Soil structure and water management: Optimal soil structure and water 
management practices promote root health and vigor, improving plant 
resilience to diseases. Well-drained soils with good water-holding capacity 
reduce the risk of waterlogged conditions, which can favor certain soil-
borne pathogens.

Strategies for Enhancing Soil Health for Disease Suppression:

 » Organic matter management: Incorporating organic amendments, such 
as compost or cover crops, enhances soil organic matter content, nutrient 
availability, and microbial activity. These practices improve soil structure, 
water retention, and nutrient cycling, leading to healthier soils and enhanced 
disease suppression.

 » Crop  rotation  and  diversification:  Implementing  crop  rotation  and 
diversification practices disrupts disease cycles, reduces pathogen buildup, 
and enhances soil microbial diversity. Different crop species have varying 
susceptibilities to diseases, and alternating crops can break disease cycles, 
limiting the spread and establishment of soil-borne pathogens.

 » Biological soil amendments: Applying beneficial microorganisms, such 
as biocontrol agents or microbial inoculants, can introduce or enhance the 
populations of disease-suppressive organisms in the soil. These amendments 
promote disease suppression through antagonism, induced systemic resistance, 
and nutrient competition.

 » Proper nutrient management: Balanced and targeted nutrient management 
ensures  optimal  nutrient  availability  for  plants  and  supports  disease 
suppression. Regular soil testing and tailored nutrient application based 
on crop needs can help maintain nutrient balance and prevent nutrient 
imbalances that can predispose plants to diseases.

191

Plant Disease Management through Habitat Manipulation

The goal of habitat manipulation is to change the agricultural environment to support 
beneficial species and reduce plant diseases. The natural biological control of diseases 
is strengthened and overall plant health is promoted through habitat manipulation, 
which modifies the structure, variety, and resource availability of the environment.

Principles of Habitat Manipulation for Disease Management

 » Biodiversity:  Increasing  biodiversity  within  the  agroecosystem  is  a 
fundamental principle of habitat manipulation. Diverse habitats support a 
wide range of organisms, including natural enemies of plant pathogens, which 
can provide biological control. Higher biodiversity enhances the stability and 
resilience of the ecosystem, making it more resistant to disease outbreaks.
 » Connectivity: Creating habitat patches or corridors that connect different 
habitats within the landscape facilitates the movement of beneficial organisms, 
such as pollinators, predators, and parasitoids. Increased connectivity improves 
their access to resources and target areas, enhancing their effectiveness in 
suppressing diseases.

 » Resource Provision: Habitat manipulation involves providing suitable 
resources, such as floral resources for beneficial insects or nesting sites for 
natural enemies, within or near agricultural fields. These resources attract 
and support beneficial organisms, increasing their abundance and promoting 
their activity against plant pathogens.

 » Planting floral resources: Incorporating flowering plants in and around 
agricultural fields provides nectar and pollen resources for beneficial insects, 
including predators and parasitoids. These insects can feed on floral resources 
and subsequently prey on or parasitize plant pathogens, contributing to 
disease suppression.

 »

Implementing cover crops: Cover crops serve as temporary habitat and 
provide multiple benefits for disease management. They enhance soil health, 
suppress weeds, and attract beneficial insects. Cover crops with diverse plant 
species promote biodiversity, enhance natural enemy populations, and limit 
the spread of diseases.

 » Establishing hedgerows and windbreaks: Hedgerows and windbreaks act 
as barriers or borders around agricultural fields, creating diverse habitats that 
support beneficial organisms. These linear features provide shelter, nesting 
sites, and floral resources, attracting natural enemies of plant pathogens and 
enhancing their presence in the agroecosystem.

192

 » Maintaining riparian zones and wetlands: Preserving riparian zones and 
wetlands within or adjacent to agricultural areas enhances habitat diversity 
and water availability. These habitats promote the presence of natural enemies 
and can act as buffers, reducing the movement of pathogens from water 
sources into agricultural fields.

Benefits of habitat manipulation for disease management

 » Enhanced biological control: Habitat manipulation promotes the abundance 
and activity of natural enemies, such as predatory insects, parasitoids, and 
insectivorous birds, which contribute to biological control (Mäntylä et al., 
2017). Increased populations of these beneficial organisms can lead to 
efficient and sustainable disease suppression.

 » Reduced pesticide use: Effective habitat manipulation strategies can 
reduce the reliance on chemical pesticides. By enhancing natural biological 
control, habitat manipulation decreases the need for chemical interventions, 
minimizing environmental risks and preserving ecosystem health.

 » Enhanced pollination: Habitat manipulation practices that promote floral 
resources and attract pollinators contribute to improved pollination services. 
Adequate pollination enhances crop yields, quality, and resilience against 
diseases.

 » Ecosystem services: Habitat manipulation provides additional ecosystem 
services,  such  as  improved  soil  health,  water  retention,  and  carbon 
sequestration. These services contribute to the overall sustainability and 
resilience of agricultural systems.

Plant Disease Management through cultural practices

Cultural practices are essential components of ecological disease management, 
emphasizing the modification of cultural practices to prevent disease outbreaks 
and promote plant health (Vidal & Kikkert, 2010). Unlike chemical interventions, 
cultural practices focus on sustainable approaches that minimize environmental 
impacts and promote long-term disease suppression.

Key benefits of cultural practices for ecological disease management:

 »

Sustainable  and  environmentally  friendly:  Cultural  practices  offer 
sustainable and environmentally friendly approaches to disease management. 
By emphasizing prevention, these practices reduce reliance on chemical 
interventions, minimizing environmental risks and preserving ecosystem 
health.

193

 » Long-term disease suppression: Cultural practices contribute to long-
term disease suppression by targeting the underlying factors that influence 
disease development. These practices promote soil health, biodiversity, and 
crop resilience, creating an agroecosystem that is less susceptible to diseases 
over time.

 »

Integrated Pest Management (IPM): Cultural practices can be integrated 
into IPM programs, combining multiple control tactics for sustainable disease 
management. They complement other IPM components, such as biological 
control and chemical interventions, to enhance disease suppression while 
minimizing environmental impacts.

 » Cost-effective: Cultural practices are often cost-effective compared to 
chemical interventions. They focus on preventative measures, reducing 
the need for expensive inputs and frequent pesticide applications. By 
implementing cultural practices, growers can optimize resource utilization 
and minimize economic losses due to diseases.

Specific cultural practices that can be used for ecological disease management:

1.  Crop rotation: Crop rotation is a fundamental cultural practice that involves 
the systematic alternation of different crop species within a specific field 
or across the farm. This practice disrupts the life cycles of plant pathogens, 
preventing the buildup of pathogen populations and reducing disease 
incidence.

2.  Sanitation: Sanitation practices focus on the removal and destruction of 
plant debris, infected plants, and diseased materials. Prompt removal of 
infected plant parts reduces the availability of inoculum sources, limiting 
disease spread. Proper disposal of diseased materials through burning, 
burying, or composting helps prevent the survival and spread of pathogens. 
Sanitation practices also include cleaning and disinfecting tools, equipment, 
and greenhouse structures to minimize the transmission of pathogens.

3.  Planting density and spacing: Planting density and spacing are critical 
factors in disease management. Proper plant spacing promotes good airflow 
and light penetration, reducing humidity levels and creating a less favorable 
environment for disease development. Adequate spacing between plants 
prevents the spread of pathogens through direct contact and improves the 
efficacy of cultural practices, such as pruning and spraying. Optimal planting 
density and spacing ensure that plants have adequate access to light, nutrients, 
and water, promoting overall plant health and disease resistance.

194

4.  Timing of operations: Timing of cultural practices, such as planting, 
irrigation, fertilization, and harvesting, plays a crucial role in disease 
management. Timely operations can help minimize disease risks by avoiding 
periods of high pathogen activity and vulnerability of plants. For example, 
planting during optimal weather conditions can promote vigorous growth 
and reduce susceptibility to diseases. Similarly, irrigation and fertilization 
practices should be tailored to avoid creating favorable conditions for 
pathogen growth and spread.

5.  Soil health management: Healthy soils are essential for plant disease 
management. Cultural practices that promote soil health, such as organic 
matter management, cover cropping, and minimizing soil disturbance, 
contribute to disease suppression. Organic matter enhances soil fertility, 
microbial diversity, and nutrient availability, promoting overall plant health 
and resilience to diseases. Cover cropping improves soil structure, water 
infiltration, and nutrient cycling, creating an environment conducive to 
beneficial microorganisms and suppressing pathogens.

Interactions between plants, pests, and diseases in agroecosystems

Agroecosystems are complex and dynamic systems consisting of crops, pests, diseases, 
and their environment. Plants, pests, and diseases interact within these systems, 
creating intricate ecological relationships that impact agricultural productivity and 
sustainability. Understanding these interactions is essential for developing effective 
pest and disease management strategies that minimize environmental impacts and 
promote sustainable agriculture (Tamm et al., 2018).

Factors Influencing Interactions:

Several factors influence the interactions between plants, pests, and diseases in 
agroecosystems:

 » Plant Traits: Plant traits, such as genetic composition, growth habits, and 
physiological characteristics, influence their susceptibility or resistance 
to pests and diseases. Some plants may possess natural defenses, such as 
secondary metabolites or physical barriers, that deter pests or limit disease 
development.

 » Pest and Disease Dynamics: Pest and disease populations are influenced 
by various factors, including environmental conditions, host availability, 
and natural enemies. Changes in these factors can affect pest and disease 
abundance, distribution, and severity within agroecosystems.

195

 » Environmental Conditions: Environmental factors, such as temperature, 
humidity, and precipitation, influence the development and spread of pests 
and diseases. Favorable environmental conditions can accelerate pathogen 
growth, insect reproduction, and disease progression, leading to increased 
risks and impacts.

 » Landscape Structure: The structure and composition of the surrounding 
landscape can influence pest and disease dynamics within agroecosystems. 
Landscape features, such as nearby forests, water bodies, or non-crop 
vegetation, can serve as reservoirs for pests or pathogens, contributing to 
their spread into agricultural fields.

Direct Interactions:

 » Plant-Pest Interactions: Pests, including insects, mites, nematodes, and 
rodents, interact directly with plants, causing damage through feeding, 
tunneling, or oviposition (Müller & Hilker, 2017). These interactions can 
lead to yield losses, reduced quality, and increased susceptibility to diseases.
 » Plant-Disease Interactions: Pathogens, including bacteria, fungi, viruses, 
and nematodes, interact directly with plants, causing infections and diseases 
(Thomas & Blanford, 2003). Pathogens can invade plant tissues, reproduce, 
and spread, leading to symptoms such as wilting, necrosis, or discoloration.

Indirect Interactions:

 » Plant-Pest-Disease Interactions: Pests and diseases can interact indirectly 
through their effects on plants. For example, pest damage, such as feeding or 
tunneling, can create entry points for pathogens, increasing the susceptibility 
of plants to diseases. Similarly, diseases can weaken plants, making them 
more susceptible to pest attacks.

 » Plant-Microbe Interactions: Beneficial microorganisms, such as rhizobacteria 
or mycorrhizal fungi, can interact with plants and influence their resistance 
to pests and diseases (Liang et al., 2018). These microorganisms can induce 
systemic resistance or promote nutrient uptake, enhancing plant health and 
resilience against pests and pathogens.

Implications for Sustainable Agriculture:

Understanding the interactions between plants, pests, and diseases in agroecosystems 
is crucial for sustainable agriculture:

 »

Integrated Pest Management (IPM): Integrated approaches that consider 

196

the complex interactions within agroecosystems are essential for effective 
pest and disease management. Integrated Pest Management (IPM) combines 
multiple  control  tactics,  such  as  cultural  practices,  biological  control, 
and chemical interventions, to minimize pest and disease impacts while 
minimizing environmental risks.

 » Crop Diversity: Promoting crop diversity within agroecosystems can disrupt 
pest and disease cycles and reduce the risk of severe outbreaks. Growing 
different crop species or varieties with varying growth habits and disease 
resistance traits can create a less favorable environment for pests and diseases, 
minimizing their impacts.

 » Habitat Manipulation: Manipulating the habitat structure within and 
around agroecosystems can enhance biological control and promote plant 
health. Creating diverse habitats, such as hedgerows or cover crops, provides 
shelter, nectar resources, and alternative prey for beneficial insects, promoting 
their abundance and effectiveness in suppressing pests and diseases.
 » Cultural Practices: Implementing cultural practices, such as crop rotation, 
sanitation, and optimal planting density, can reduce pest and disease pressures. 
These practices disrupt pest and disease life cycles, remove disease sources, 
and create conditions less favorable for pathogen development and pest 
establishment

Utilizing Plant Diversity for Disease Resistance

Plant diseases pose significant threats to agricultural productivity and food security. 
Utilizing plant diversity offers a sustainable approach to disease resistance by 
harnessing the natural defense mechanisms present in different plant species and 
varieties.
 »

Importance of Genetic Diversity: Genetic diversity within plant populations 
provides a valuable resource for disease resistance. Different plant genotypes 
exhibit varying degrees of resistance to pathogens, allowing for the selection 
of resistant individuals or varieties. Genetic diversity increases the likelihood 
of encountering resistant genotypes and enables the development of disease-
resistant crops through breeding programs.

 » Role of Plant Secondary Metabolites: Plant secondary metabolites, such as 
phytoalexins, alkaloids, and phenolic compounds, play a crucial role in disease 
resistance. These compounds are produced in response to pathogen attacks 
and can inhibit pathogen growth, disrupt their life cycles, or strengthen plant 
defense mechanisms. Plant diversity provides a wide range of secondary 

197

metabolites with different chemical properties, enhancing the potential for 
disease resistance.

 » Utilizing Resistant Cultivars: Selecting and utilizing resistant cultivars 
is a practical approach for disease management. Resistant cultivars are 
developed through breeding programs that aim to incorporate disease 
resistance genes into elite plant varieties. These cultivars exhibit improved 
resistance to specific diseases, reducing the need for chemical interventions 
and providing sustainable disease management solutions.

 » Exploiting Wild Relatives: Wild relatives of cultivated plants are valuable 
sources of genetic diversity and disease resistance traits. These species have 
evolved under diverse environmental conditions and have developed robust 
defense mechanisms against pathogens. By incorporating genes from wild 
relatives into cultivated varieties, breeders can enhance disease resistance 
and develop crops with improved resilience to diseases.

Enhancing Plant Diversity in Agricultural Systems:

There are a number of ways to enhance plant diversity in agricultural systems, 
including:

 » Crop rotation: Crop rotation involves the systematic alternation of different 
crop species in a specific field or across the farm. Rotating crops with varying 
disease susceptibilities disrupts disease cycles and reduces the buildup of 
pathogen populations. Crop rotation increases genetic diversity within the 
agroecosystem, creating conditions less favorable for disease development 
and promoting overall disease resistance.

 »

Intercropping: Intercropping involves growing multiple crops in close 
proximity within the same field. Intercropping promotes biodiversity, 
enhances ecological interactions, and reduces disease incidence. The diverse 
plant species in intercropping systems can interfere with pathogen dispersal, 
provide natural barriers, and improve overall disease resistance through the 
dilution effect.

 » Agroforestry systems: Agroforestry systems integrate trees with agricultural 
crops, creating diverse and dynamic landscapes. These systems enhance 
biodiversity, provide microclimatic conditions, and promote beneficial 
interactions among plants. Agroforestry systems contribute to disease 
resistance by enhancing habitat diversity, attracting beneficial organisms, 
and creating a more resilient agroecosystem.

198

Benefits of Utilizing Plant Diversity for Disease Resistance

There are a number of benefits to utilizing plant diversity for disease resistance, 
including:
 »

Sustainable disease management: Utilizing plant diversity for disease 
resistance reduces the reliance on chemical interventions and promotes 
sustainable disease management practices. Genetic diversity and resistance 
traits contribute to long-term disease suppression, improving crop health 
and reducing economic losses.

 » Environmental protection: Maximizing plant diversity in agricultural 
systems contributes to environmental protection. By reducing the use of 
chemical pesticides and promoting ecosystem resilience, plant diversity 
helps maintain biodiversity, preserve beneficial organisms, and minimize 
the environmental impacts associated with disease management.

 » Resilience to changing conditions: Plant diversity enhances the resilience 
of agricultural systems to changing environmental conditions and emerging 
diseases (Altieri & Nicholls, 2013). The wide range of genetic diversity and 
defense mechanisms present in diverse plant populations provides a reservoir 
of traits that can adapt to new challenges and stresses.

Sustainable Management Strategies Using Ecological Engineering

Ecological engineering is an interdisciplinary field that applies ecological principles 
to design and manage ecosystems for sustainable outcomes (Gurr et al., 2004). It 
encompasses the integration of biological, physical, and engineering concepts to 
create harmonious and resilient systems.

Key Principles of Ecological Engineering

 » Functional diversity: Ecological engineering focuses on enhancing functional 
diversity within ecosystems. Functional diversity refers to the variety of species 
and ecological roles present in a system. By promoting diverse functional 
groups, ecological engineering aims to improve ecosystem stability, resilience, 
and productivity.

 » Ecosystem services: Ecological engineering aims to enhance the provision 
of ecosystem services, which are the benefits that ecosystems provide to 
humans. These services include pollination, soil fertility, water purification, 
pest control, and climate regulation. By optimizing ecosystem functions, 
ecological engineering supports the sustainable provision of these services.
 » Natural processes and feedbacks: Ecological engineering emphasizes 

199

harnessing and enhancing natural processes and feedbacks within ecosystems. 
Understanding and leveraging natural interactions, such as nutrient cycling, 
predator-prey relationships, and plant-soil interactions, can lead to more 
sustainable and self-regulating systems.

Techniques and Strategies of Ecological Engineering

 » Habitat creation and restoration: Creating and restoring habitats, such 
as wetlands, riparian zones, or buffer strips, is a key technique in ecological 
engineering. These habitats enhance biodiversity, provide nesting and foraging 
sites for wildlife, and act as buffers to minimize pollution runoff.

 » Biodiversity enhancement: Promoting biodiversity is a fundamental aspect 
of ecological engineering. This can be achieved through techniques such as 
planting native vegetation, establishing wildlife corridors, or incorporating 
cover crops in agricultural systems. Increased biodiversity contributes to 
ecosystem resilience, stability, and the provision of multiple ecosystem 
services.

 » Biological control: Utilizing natural enemies, such as predators, parasitoids, 
or pathogens, for pest control is an important component of ecological 
engineering. By enhancing the presence and activity of beneficial organisms, 
ecological engineering reduces reliance on chemical pesticides, minimizes 
ecological disruptions, and promotes natural pest control.

 » Agroforestry and permaculture: Agroforestry and permaculture systems 
integrate trees, crops, and livestock, promoting ecological interactions and 
multiple functions. These systems enhance biodiversity, improve soil health, 
conserve water, and provide sustainable food production.

Benefits of Sustainable Management Strategies Using Ecological Engineering
 » Biodiversity conservation: Ecological engineering contributes to biodiversity 
conservation by creating and enhancing habitats for native flora and fauna. 
Increased biodiversity supports ecosystem resilience, genetic diversity, and 
the conservation of endangered species.

 » Enhanced ecosystem services: Sustainable management strategies utilizing 
ecological engineering enhance the provision of ecosystem services. Pollination, 
soil fertility, water purification, pest control, and climate regulation are 
improved through the promotion of biodiversity, functional diversity, and 
natural processes.

 » Climate change mitigation and adaptation: Ecological engineering can 

200

 »

 »

help mitigate and adapt to climate change impacts. Strategies such as 
reforestation, carbon sequestration, and the promotion of resilient agricultural 
systems enhance ecosystem capacity to sequester carbon, reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions, and mitigate climate-related risks.

Sustainable agriculture: Ecological engineering offers sustainable solutions 
for agriculture. Techniques such as agroforestry, biological control, and 
cover cropping promote soil health, reduce chemical inputs, improve water 
management, and enhance crop productivity and resilience.

Examples of Sustainable Management Strategies

 » Constructed wetlands for water treatment: Constructed wetlands utilize 
natural processes and diverse plant species to treat wastewater and improve 
water quality. These systems provide a cost-effective and sustainable approach 
to water treatment, while also enhancing wildlife habitat and biodiversity.
 » Riparian buffer strips for nutrient management: Riparian buffer strips, 
consisting of vegetation along water bodies, can effectively reduce nutrient 
runoff from agricultural fields. These buffer strips act as filters, intercepting 
and absorbing nutrients before they enter waterways, reducing the risk of 
water pollution and promoting water quality.

Integrated pest management (IPM) in agriculture:  IPM  integrates 
various  ecological  engineering  techniques,  such  as  biological  control, 
habitat manipulation, and cultural practices, to manage pests sustainably. By 
combining multiple tactics, IPM reduces pesticide use, preserves beneficial 
organisms, and promotes natural pest control.

Integration of Ecological Engineering with Conventional Disease Management 
Approaches

The integration of ecological engineering with conventional approaches can lead to 
synergistic effects in disease management, reduced reliance on chemical inputs, and 
enhanced ecological sustainability. However, there are some challenges to integration, 
such as the need for knowledge and expertise, site-specific considerations, and 
compatibility with existing practices.

Some practical examples of integration include conservation biological control, 
habitat manipulation, crop rotation, and integrated pest management (IPM). Overall, 
the integration of ecological engineering with conventional disease management 
approaches offers a promising way to improve the sustainability and effectiveness 
of disease management.

201

Here are some specific examples of how ecological engineering can be used to 

complement conventional disease management:

 » Conservation biological control: This approach involves creating habitats 
and providing resources to support populations of natural enemies of pests 
and pathogens. This can help to reduce the reliance on chemical control, as 
beneficial insects can help to control both pests and diseases.

 » Habitat manipulation: This can be done by planting flowering plants, 
establishing  hedgerows,  or  incorporating  cover  crops. These  habitat 
modifications can enhance biodiversity, attract natural enemies, and promote 
biological control of diseases and pests.

 » Crop rotation: This involves alternating crops with varying susceptibilities 
to diseases. This can help to disrupt disease cycles and reduce pathogen 
populations.

 »

Integrated pest management (IPM): This is an approach that integrates 
multiple disease management tactics, including ecological engineering 
techniques, chemical control, host resistance, and cultural practices. By 
combining multiple tactics, IPM can promote sustainable disease management, 
minimize pesticide use, and maximize the efficacy of ecological engineering 
strategies

Economic and Environmental Benefits of Ecological Engineering in Plant 
Disease Management

Ecological engineering is a field that applies ecological principles to design and 
manage ecosystems for sustainable outcomes. It can be used to manage plant diseases 
in a way that is both economically beneficial and environmentally friendly.

There are a number of economic benefits to using ecological engineering for 

plant disease management. These include:

 » Reduced chemical inputs: Ecological engineering techniques can help to 
reduce the need for chemical pesticides and fungicides. This can save growers 
money on production costs.

 »

Increased crop yield and quality: Ecological engineering can help to improve 
plant health, which can lead to increased crop yield and quality. This can 
also lead to increased profits for growers.

 » Market opportunities and consumer demand: Consumers are increasingly 
concerned about the environmental and health impacts of chemical inputs in 
food production. Ecological engineering practices, which minimize chemical 

202

use and promote sustainability, can create market opportunities and meet 
the growing demand for environmentally friendly and socially responsible 
products (Tilman et al., 2002).

There are also a number of environmental benefits to using ecological engineering 

for plant disease management. These include:

 » Reduced environmental pollution: Ecological engineering techniques can 
help to reduce the release of synthetic chemicals into the environment. This 
can protect water resources, beneficial organisms, and overall ecosystem 
health.

 » Enhanced ecosystem services: Ecological engineering can help to enhance 
ecosystem services, such as pollination, soil fertility, and natural pest control. 
This can contribute to sustainable agricultural systems and the preservation 
of natural resources.

 »

Improved soil health: Ecological engineering can help to improve soil 
health. Healthy soils support beneficial microorganisms, improve nutrient 
cycling, and enhance plant resilience to diseases. This can lead to long-term 
sustainability of agricultural systems.

 » Biodiversity conservation: Ecological engineering can help to conserve 
biodiversity within agricultural landscapes. This can contribute to ecosystem 
resilience, genetic diversity, and the overall health of agroecosystems.

Some practical examples of the economic and environmental benefits of 

ecological engineering for plant disease management include:

 » Organic farming: Organic farming relies on ecological engineering principles 
and offers numerous economic and environmental benefits. Reduced chemical 
inputs, enhanced soil health, and improved biodiversity contribute to 
lower production costs, increased market opportunities, and improved 
environmental sustainability.

 » Conservation biological control: Conservation biological control is a key 
component of ecological engineering and promotes the activity of natural 
enemies for pest and disease control. By reducing reliance on chemical 
pesticides, growers can minimize production costs and protect beneficial 
organisms, leading to economic and environmental benefits.

 » Agroforestry systems: Agroforestry systems, which combine trees with 
agricultural crops, offer economic and environmental advantages. These 
systems provide additional income streams from tree products, such as fruits 
or timber, while enhancing biodiversity, improving soil health, and promoting 

203

 »

ecosystem services, contributing to sustainability and profitability.

Integrated pest management (IPM): IPM integrates ecological engineering 
techniques with other disease management approaches, emphasizing reduced 
chemical inputs and reliance on natural control mechanisms (Lopes et al., 
2019). By adopting IPM, growers can achieve economic savings, improved 
crop yield and quality, and reduced environmental impacts (Rodríguez-Rajo 
et al., 2005).

Future Prospects and Challenges in Ecological Engineering for Plant 
Disease Control

Ecological engineering is a promising approach to plant disease control that can 
provide sustainable and environmentally friendly solutions. There are a number of 
emerging trends and technological advancements that have the potential to enhance 
the application of ecological engineering, such as precision agriculture, molecular 
tools, and climate-smart agriculture (Boller & Felix, 2009). However, there are also 
some knowledge gaps and socio-economic factors that need to be addressed before 
ecological engineering can be widely adopted.

One of the key challenges to the widespread adoption of ecological engineering 
is the need for a better understanding of ecological interactions and mechanisms 
underlying disease suppression. Research is needed to elucidate the roles of different 
organisms, such as beneficial microbes, predators, and parasitoids, in disease control. 
Additionally, studying the impacts of landscape structure, habitat connectivity, and 
plant-microbe interactions can enhance our understanding of disease dynamics in 
agroecosystems.

Another challenge to the adoption of ecological engineering is the need to scale 
up these strategies for large-scale implementation. Research is needed to assess the 
scalability of ecological engineering techniques, considering factors such as landscape 
heterogeneity, economic viability, and compatibility with existing agricultural systems. 
Understanding the socio-economic and policy factors that influence adoption is also 
crucial for effective implementation.

Despite these challenges, ecological engineering has the potential to revolutionize 
plant disease control by providing sustainable and environmentally friendly solutions. 
By investing in research, knowledge exchange, policy support, and stakeholder 
engagement, ecological engineering can become an integral part of sustainable and 
effective plant disease management in the future.

204

Conclusion

Ecological engineering is a promising approach to plant disease management that 
can provide sustainable and environmentally friendly solutions. By leveraging 
natural processes and enhancing biodiversity, ecological engineering can help to 
create more resilient and sustainable agricultural systems. There are a number of 
emerging trends and technological advancements that have the potential to enhance 
the application of ecological engineering, such as precision agriculture, molecular 
tools, and climate-smart agriculture. However, there are also some knowledge gaps 
and socio-economic factors that need to be addressed before ecological engineering 
can be widely adopted.

One of the key challenges to the widespread adoption of ecological engineering 
is the need for a better understanding of ecological interactions and mechanisms 
underlying disease suppression. Research is needed to elucidate the roles of different 
organisms, such as beneficial microbes, predators, and parasitoids, in disease control. 
Additionally, studying the impacts of landscape structure, habitat connectivity, and 
plant-microbe interactions can enhance our understanding of disease dynamics in 
agroecosystems. Another challenge to the adoption of ecological engineering is 
the need to scale up these strategies for large-scale implementation. Research is 
needed to assess the scalability of ecological engineering techniques, considering 
factors such as landscape heterogeneity, economic viability, and compatibility with 
existing agricultural systems. Understanding the socio-economic and policy factors 
that influence adoption is also crucial for effective implementation.

Despite these challenges, ecological engineering has the potential to revolutionize 
plant disease control by providing sustainable and environmentally friendly solutions. 
By investing in research, knowledge exchange, policy support, and stakeholder 
engagement, ecological engineering can become an integral part of sustainable and 
effective plant disease management in the future.

In conclusion, ecological engineering is a promising approach to plant disease 
control with the potential to provide sustainable and environmentally friendly 
solutions. However, there are a number of challenges that need to be addressed before 
ecological engineering can be widely adopted. By investing in research, knowledge 
exchange, policy support, and stakeholder engagement, the future of ecological 
engineering in plant disease management looks bright.

205

References

Altieri, M. A., & Nicholls, C. I. (2013). Agroecology and the design of climate 
change-resilient farming systems. Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems, 
37(7), 869-890.

Bélanger, R. R., Labrecque, M., & Desjardins, Y. (2003). Strategies for managing 
foliar diseases of greenhouse tomatoes without the use of chemical fungicides. 
Crop Protection, 22(1), 13-19.

Boller, T., & Felix, G. (2009). A renaissance of elicitors: Perception of microbe-
associated molecular patterns and danger signals by pattern-recognition receptors. 
Annual Review of Plant Biology, 60, 379-406.

Cook, R. J., & Baker, K. F. (1983). The nature and practice of biological control of 

plant pathogens. The American Phytopathological Society.

Ferrandino, F. J., & Smart, C. D. (2017). Practical applications of induced resistance 
to plant diseases: An appraisal of effectiveness under field conditions. Journal 
of the American Society for Horticultural Science, 142(4), 243-255.

Gurr, G. M., Wratten, S. D., & Altieri, M. A. (2004). Ecological engineering for 
pest management: Advances in habitat manipulation for arthropods. CABI 
Publishing.

Haddad, N. M., Tilman, D., Haarstad, J., Ritchie, M. E., & Knops, J. M. (2001). 
Contrasting effects of plant richness and composition on insect communities: 
A field experiment. The American Naturalist, 158(1), 17-35.

Jørgensen, L. N., Pauly, L., & Lübeck, M. (2017). Integrated pest management of 
plant pathogens: Epidemiological concepts, tools and methods. Integrated Pest 
Management Reviews, 22(1), 18-47.

Kessel, G. J., Frinking, H. D., & Dijkema, G. P. (2004). Ecosystem services in 

sustainable agriculture. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture, 24(3), 5-28.

Lefèvre, F., & Fravel, D. R. (2020). Combination of biological control agents and 
cultural practices for sustainable management of soilborne plant diseases. Journal 
of Phytopathology, 168(5), 255-266.

Liang, J., Bi, Y., He, H., Fang, W., & Huang, X. (2018). Integrated control of wheat 
diseases by using plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Crop Protection, 107, 
67-75.

Lopes, L. D., Hau, B., & Santos, A. (2019). Ecological engineering in plant pathology: 
Practices and perspectives. Journal of Plant Pathology, 101(4), 1009-1024.

206

Malvick, D. K. (2016). Ecology and management of soilborne cereal pathogens: 
Status and challenges. In Soilborne Diseases of Cereals and Their Control (pp. 
1-32). Springer.

Mäntylä, E., Klemola, T., & Laaksonen, T. (2017). Birds help plants: A meta-analysis 
of top-down trophic cascades caused by avian predators. Oecologia, 183(1), 1-14.

Matsui, K., & Cowling, E. B. (2004). Chemical induction of disease resistance in 

plants. Journal of Chemical Ecology, 30(5), 1003-1023.

Müller, C., & Hilker, M. (2017). Plant-insect interactions in chemically complex 

landscapes. Annual Review of Entomology, 62, 451-473.

Poveda, K., & Rausher, M. D. (2011). Genetic variation and the evolution of resistance 
and tolerance in natural enemies. In Resistance Evolution in Pest Systems (pp. 
129-147). Academic Press.

Rodríguez-Rajo, F. J., Jato, V., & Aira, M. J. (2005). Economic evaluation of the 
effects of plant disease control on crops: A review. Spanish Journal of Agricultural 
Research, 3(3), 295-303.

Steinberg, C., & Edel-Hermann, V. (2019). Ecological engineering for plant 
protection: Concepts, applications, and perspectives. In Ecological Engineering 
for Pest Management (pp. 19-38). Springer.

Tamm, L., Thürig, B., & Bruns, C. (2018). Ecological strategies in organic and 
integrated apple production systems and their effects on plant health. Frontiers 
in Environmental Science, 6, 4.

Thomas, M. B., & Blanford, S. (2003). Thermal biology in insect-parasite interactions. 

Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 18(7), 344-350.

Tilman, D., Cassman, K. G., Matson, P. A., Naylor, R., & Polasky, S. (2002). 
Agricultural sustainability and intensive production practices. Nature, 418(6898), 
671-677.

Van Elsas, J. D., Chiurazzi, M., Mallon, C. A., Elhottová, D., Kristufek, V., & Salles, 
J. F. (2012). Microbial diversity determines the invasion of soil by a bacterial 
pathogen. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(4), 1159-1164.

Vidal, S., & Kikkert, J. R. (2010). Integrated approaches to control soilborne fungal 
pathogens and pests of greenhouse crops. Phytopathology, 100(8), 901-912.

207

14 Techniques in Phytopathology

Alby John1, Deepa R. Chandran2 and Saru Sara Sam3
1,2,3Department of Plant Pathology, College of Agriculture, Vellayani, Kerala 
Agricultural, University, Thiruvananthapuram- 695522, Kerala

Abstract

The detection and diagnosis of infection in plants has changed immeasurably over the 
years. Initially studies were conducted based on visual observations including signs 
and symptoms. Later with the advancement of science and technology, numerous 
techniques were developed. Starting from the culturing of microbes, morphological 
studies with the aid of different microscopy, biochemical tests, serological assay, 
molecular techniques till omic technologies and artificial intelligence for disease 
detection are discussed. Omics have provided various approaches to unveil the 
different key components responsible for disease resistance. All these techniques 
play a crucial role in understanding the pathogen biology, its host interaction and 
developing suitable management measures. Different novel methods are emerging 
day by day which will ultimately benefit by attaining sustainable food production.

Keywords: Isolation, staining techniques, microscopy, biochemical test, immunology, 
PCR variants, molecular markers, nucleic acid hybridization, omics approach, 
biosensors, artificial intelligence

Introduction

According to FAO 2022, it is estimated that 40 percent of global crop production is 
lost annually due to pest and diseases which cost the global economy over 220 billion 
dollars. The threat is further enhanced by the unprecedented climatic conditions, 
hindering the way towards sustainable development. Phytopathology plays a crucial 
role in diagnosing and detecting the disease caused by various microbes through 

208

diverse techniques from basic to advanced level, which will ultimately benefit the 
farming community by deriving effective management strategies. Earlier records of 
disease identification were based on symptomatology which lacked accuracy and a 
more scientific approach was required. Later, methods for isolation, culturing and 
preservation of microbes developed. In the next stage, application of serological 
and molecular techniques deepened our knowledge on host pathogen interaction. 
Currently, the application of cutting-edge technologies like artificial intelligence and 
biosensors has given rise to crop forecasting models, where the farmer will get up 
to date information on health status of the plant. All these techniques from basics 
to advanced level have a significant role in understanding the pathogen biology, its 
host interaction and developing suitable management measures.

Techniques in Plant Pathology

Techniques in phytopathology can be broadly classified as direct and indirect methods. 
Direct method is a destructive approach, where samples from the field are taken 
for various lab analysis. Whereas, indirect method detect disease in the field itself 
without uprooting the plant i.e., based on variation in the light energy reflected and 
the volatile compounds released during stress condition. Direct methods comprise 
three main categories: conventional, serological and molecular techniques (Burns, 
2009).

1.  Isolation, purification and inoculation techniques for plant pathogens

Fungal pathogens are isolated from infected tissues by surface sterilization and 
plating on potato dextrose agar (PDA) medium, soil borne pathogens through serial 
dilutionof soil samples and baiting techniques for certain types of organisms. Examples 
of different baits used for some pathogens are cotton twigs (Rhizoctoniabataticola), 
apple (Pythiumand Phytophthora), carrot disc (Theilaviopsis paradoxa), sorghum 
seeds  (Sclerotiumrolfsii),  paddy  culms  (Dreschlera  oryzae)  and  sugarcane  disc 
(Ceratocystisparadoxa).Fungal pathogens isolated through these techniques are then 
purified by single spore isolation and hyphal tip method. Single sporing involves 
the transfer of a single germinated conidium to obtain a pure culture. This method 
is suitable for fungi that produce spores in culture E.g., Verticillium, Fusarium, 
Alternaria, Colletotrichum, Phoma etc. Hyphal tip method involves the transfer of 
a single hyphal tip to obtain a pure culture which is commonly done for Pythium, 
Phytophthora, Rhizoctonia, Sclerotium etc.

Bacterial pathogens are isolated from infected tissues (leaf, stem) by surface 
sterilization and plating on nutrient agar (NA) medium, through serial dilution of 
soil samples and form bacterial suspension. Purification of bacteria is done through 
pour plate, spread plate, simple streak and quadrant streak technique.

209

Koch postulates are performed on host plants under controlled conditions to 
prove the pathogenicity of the pathogen isolated from infected sample. According to 
the characteristics of the pathogen, host and process of infection different inoculation 
techniques is done on root, seeds, leaves and inflorescence i.e.,natural exposure of 
inoculum or direct application to host parts through spray inoculation, leaf clipping, 
pin pricking, swabbing, root dipping, leaf injection, seed inoculation, soil inoculation 
etc. can be done(Darshan et al., 2021).

Unlike fungi and bacteria, viruses are obligate intracellular organisms which 
require living cells to support their replication. Purification is the process of separating 
virus particles from the host cell constituentsthrough extraction, clarification, 
concentration and final purification. Virus is extracted using citrate, phosphate or 
borate buffer depending on the virus to be purified. Generally,phosphate buffer of 0.1 
M and pH 7.4 is used. Other components of the extraction medium like metal ions (Ca 
2+, Mg 2+), reducing agents (2- mercaptoethanol), additives (bentonite clay), chelating 
agents (Na-EDTA), detergents (Triton X-100) etc. keep the virus intact without 
aggregation during the isolation procedure.The separation of virus particle from the 
host cell is called clarification, also referred as partial purification.Concentration 
of the virus is performed through ultra centrifugation, PEG precipitation and salt 
precipitation. Later final purification is done through repeated centrifugation steps 
and virus layer is manually collected using hypodermic syringe. If differentviral 
properties like amino acid composition, nucleotide composition, percentage of protein, 
sedimentation profile etc. do not change upon further purification, the preparation 
is said to be pure (Hull, 2002).

2.  Staining methods

Table 1: Staining for bacteria ( Jayaramanand Verma, 2002)

Stain used

Description

Staining 
method
Simple

Methylene blue /safranin / carbol 
fuschin / crystal violet

Gram 
staining

Crystal violet (primary stain), iodine 
(mordant),  alcohol  (decolourising 
agent), safranin (counter stain)

Helps to determine cell 
shape, size and arrangement 
of bacterial cells
Used  to  distinguish  gram 
positive and negative bacteria. 
Bacteria which appear blue are 
gram  positive,  red  are  gram 
negative.

210

Acid fast 
staining

Endospore 
staining
Capsular 
staining
Flagella 
staining

Carbol  fuchsin  (primary  stain), 
alcohol  (decolourising  agent), 
methylene blue (counter stain)
Malachite  green  (primary  stain), 
safranin (counter stain)
Nigrosin,  alcohol  (decolourising 
agent), crystal violet (counter stain)
Tannic  acid  and  potassium  alum 
(mordant), carbol fuschin

Acid fast bacteria become red 
and non-acid fast turns blue

Cells turn pink and endospores 
light green
Thin  light  region  around 
bacterial cell under 100 X
Flagellacan be observedunder 
100 X

Table 2: Staining for fungi (Darshan et al., 2021)

Staining method 

Description

Lactophenol  cotton 
blue staining (LPCB)

Giemsa staining

Used for examining all types of fungi by staining fungal 
cytoplasm. Hyphal elements turn deep blue against a light 
blue background.
Components are methylene blue (turns cytoplasm blue), 
eosin (stains nucleus red), methanol (fixative agent). Used 
to distinguish between Rhizoctonia solani andRhizoctonia 
like organism by counting number of nuclei.

Calcofluor white stain Calcofluor white binds to cellulose and chitin and Evan’s 
blue is the counter stain. Fungi appear bright green to 
blue and remaining turns reddish orange.
It is a diazo dye that stains chitin and used in confocal 
microscopy for imaging vesicular arbuscular mycorrhizae 
(VAM)

Tryptan blue

Staining for phytoplasma

Diene’s stain and DAPI (4’, 6 –diamidino – 2 – phenylindole) stain are used for 
visualizing phytoplasma of infected tissues.Diene’s stain is a nonspecific stain that 
rapidly diagnoses field samples. Phloem of infected tissues will be stained dark blue, 
while ylem turquoise, cortex light blue and cellulose cell wall appears yellow. One 
major drawback is its low sensitivity.DAPI is quick and easy detection method that 
binds strongly to adenine-thymine rich regions in DNA, so that phytoplasma with 
low GC content can be visualized in a fluorescence microscope. Phloem cells of 
infected tissues show bright fluorescence which is absent in healthy tissues (Darshan 
et al., 2021).

211

3.  Microscopy

Microscopic studies provide the means to study pathogen biology and host pathogen 
interaction studies.

Table 3: Different types of microscopes (Mann et al., 2010)

Microscope types
Simple microscope

Description
Consist of one set of lenses and have low magnification 
power. Requires sufficient light source.

Compound microscope Magnification power of 1000- 2000 X. Objective lens 
provide the primary magnification which is added up 
by the ocular lens.
Provides 3 D view of the specimen and used for dissection 
purpose. Magnification is 50 – 100 X.

Stereo microscope

Dark field microscope

Phase-contrast 
microscope
Fluorescence 
microscope

Bright field microscope Used to examine stained specimens which forms dark 
image against a brighter background. Live cells cannot 
be observed and magnification is 1500 X.
Both live and unstained samples appear light against a 
dark background. Internal structure of microorganisms 
can be observed.
Live organism is observed in its natural condition and 
no staining is required. Magnification is 400 – 1000 X.
Fluorescence light is used to visualize specimens.Xenon 
arc lamp, mercury lamp or lasers are used as light source. 
Fluorescent stains like DAPI and Hoechst stain are used 
to visualize biological molecules.
Laser beam is used to illuminate the specimen. Image is 
digitally enhanced to view on computer.Optical imaging 
technology is used to increase optical resolution and is 
used in cellular morphology studies.
Short  beam  of  electrons  and  magnetic  condenser 
are employed to produce the image. Electron beam 
transmitted  by  ultra-thin  section  of  a  specimen  is 
focussed by lens system to form a 2 D image.

Transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM)

Cone focal scanning 
microscope

212

Scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM)

Scanning transmission 
electron microscopy 
(STEM)
Reflection electron 
microscopy (REM)

Electron  beam  is  projected  on  the  sample  which 
rapidly moves and scans the surface of the specimen 
and backscatters secondary electron which produce a 
3 D image to visualize surface structure of specimen. 
TEM with additional scanning coils, detectors and 
circuits to make it aligned to SEM.

Combination of imaging, diffraction and spectroscopy 
techniques for characterization of topography and crystal 
structure. High energy electrons are incident at glancing 
angles to the surface and reflected electrons are used to 
form REM image.

4.  Biochemical test for characterization of bacteria

Many species of bacteria are similar in size, shape and arrangement. Hence, bacterial 
identification is done mainly based on their biochemical activities.

Table 4: Different biochemical tests (Darshan et al., 2021)

Biochemical test Description

Catalase test

3 % KOH test

Differentiate gram positive and negative bacteria. Gram 
negative bacteria produce viscous water upon lifting the 
culture containing loop.
Differentiate aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. Aerobic bacteria 
produce effervescence with addition of 3% H2O2to the culture.
Levan production To test the sucrose utilization.  Levan sucrase on 5% sucrose 
agar medium produces translucent shining colonies with 
raised convex structure.
Differentiate Enterobacteriaceae sub groups where organisms 
convert glucose to acetone and culture turns pink. E.g., 
Erwinia
To check the acidity and fermentation of the culture. Methyl 
red indicator added to the samples which turns red is acidic. 
E.g., Erwinia

Vogues  Proskauer 
test

Methyl red test

3-ketolactose test Differentiate  Agrobacterium  spp.  A.  tumefaciensproduces 
3-ketolactose and forms a yellow ring of Cu2O around the 
cell mass. A.rhizogen and A. vitis produce negative result.

213

H2S test

Starch hydrolysis 
test

Citrate utilization 
test

Indole production 
test

Gelatin hydrolysis 
test

Differentiate Enterobacteriaceae members by H2S production. 
Lead acetate strip is suspended over culture inoculated on 
sulphide indole medium. Black colouration along the line 
of bacterial colony indicates H2Sproduction. E.g., Erwinia
To test the ability to produce tryptophanase. Kovac’s reagent 
is added to the culture and cherry red colour indicates positive 
result. 
To identify the gelatinase producing capacity of the organism. 
When HgCl2is flooded to culture grown on gelatin agar 
medium, clear zone around the culture indicates gelatinases. 
E.g., Bacillus
To test the starch utilization activity of bacteria by flooding 
Legol iodine solution on NA with 0.2% soluble starch.  
Colourless zone around bacterial culture against a dark blue 
background indicates amylase production. E.g., Ralstonia
Citrate enzyme production is observed by color change of 
inoculated sodium citrate agar containing bromo thymol 
blueto green. E.g., Xanthomonas
Culture is inoculated to two test tubes containing Leifon’s 
medium  with  1  %  D-  Glucose  and  Durum  tube.  Gas 
production is noted by the bubble formation. E.g., Bacillus
Carbon medium is amended with bromocresol purple dye and 
a carbon source. Yellow colour indicates the acid production. 
Fe3+utilization of bacteria is identified by amending Succinate 
medium with indicator Chromazurol S. Formation of yellow 
colour around bacterial growth in blue coloured medium 
indicates siderophore production. E.g., Pseudomonas fluorescens
Fluorescent pigment productionis detected by exposing culture 
Fluorescent 
grown onKing’s B media towards UV light. E.g., Pseudomonas
production
Potato soft rot test To distinguish pectolytic and non-pectolyticErwiniae. Rotting 
indicates pectolytic activity and slight rot shows negative 
result. E.g., Erwiniacarotovora
To confirm the pathogenicity of bacteria by inoculation of 
test bacteria by injection filtration on tobacco leaves. Sudden 
necrosis of the tissue within 12-24 hrs on infiltrated point 
indicate positive response.

Acid production 
test
Siderophore 
production 

Klement’s 
hypersensitive test

Gas production 
test

214

5.  Immunology based methods

Serology deals with specificity of antigen-antibody reaction and is widely applied 
for detection, diagnosis and characterization of plant pathogens. Serology can be 
used to detect latent infection, to develop virus free propagating material, to assess 
pathogenicity quantitatively, to detect vector borne pathogen and to conclude a 
relationship between pathogen related isolates and strains.Modern serological tests 
include ELISA, Immunoblotting, SDS PAGE, western blotting, Immunofluorescence, 
ISEM (Burns, 2009).

i.  Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)

Quantitative serological technique in which antigen – antibody reaction is determined 
by enzyme measurement. Enzyme (alkaline phosphatase, horse radish peroxidase) 
converts colourless substrate to coloured ones indicating the presence of antigen-
antibody binding. Antigen of interest is adsorbed on a polystyrene plate with 96 
micro wells and the unwanted components are washed away after each step, leaving 
only the specific reactants which is finally treated with enzyme and quantified by 
ELISA reader or spectrophotometry. ELISA can be broadly classified as direct and 
indirect based upon the type of labelled antibody. Direct ELISA is more specific 
and primary antibody directly binds to the test antigen whereas indirect ELISA 
have secondary antibody bind to the primary antibody which is bound with the 
test antigen. It is less specific and is used for broad spectrum detection of viruses.

Different types of ELISA are Direct Antigen Coated (DAC – ELISA), Double 
-Antibody Sandwich (DAS – ELISA), Protein A Sandwich (PAS) ELISA and 
Immuno-precipitation ELISA (IP-ELISA).

Direct Antigen Coated (DAC – ELISA)

Antigen is immobilized to the surface of multi-well plate. Direct DAC-ELISA is 
done by immobilised antigen detected by an enzyme conjugated primary antibody 
specific to the antigen. Indirect DAC-ELISA involves primary antibody binding 
to the immobilised antigen and a labelled antibody binds to the primary antibody 
for detection.

Double -Antibody Sandwich (DAS – ELISA)

Two antibodies specific for different epitopes of the antigen is required. One of the 
antibody coated on the surface of polystyrene plateimmobilizes the antigenand a 
detection antibody later added binds to the adsorbed antigen leading to the formation 
of antigen-antibody complex. 

215

Protein A Sandwich (PAS) ELISA

Protein A, which is obtained from the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus binds with 
the Fc portion of IgG. Bottom of the ELISA plate is coated with protein A followed 
by addition of antigen and antibody. Since the Fc region from the antibodies has 
affinity to protein A, the added antibodies will link with protein A at the bottom 
of the wellskeeping the virus in a specific orientation so that it will be free to trap 
the virus particles. 

Immuno-precipitation ELISA (IP-ELISA)

Equal volume of infected plant extract and antiserum were centrifuged and resulting 
pellet were resuspended in ELISA extraction buffer for conventional indirect ELISA.
It is used for detection of virus from different families such as Cowpea severe mosaic 
virus(CPSMV) and Squash mosaic virus (SQMV).

ii.  Immunoblotting

It is the serological detection technique, where the antigen-antibody complex is 
immobilized on nitrocellulose membrane.Using an enzyme conjugate and specific 
substrate results are visualized by the appearance of coloured spots on the membrane. 
Different immunoblotting techniques are DIBA, TIBA and dip stick assay.

Dot blots Immunobinding Assay (DIBA)

DIBA is a variant of ELISA where polystyrene plate is replaced with nitrocellulose 
membrane. Antigen is prepared by grinding tissues in Tris- buffered saline, containing 
one or more additives and a drop of test sample is spotted on the membrane. Bovine 
Serum Albumin (BSA) is used as the blocking agent. Membrane is placed in diluted 
antigen specific crude antiserum solution at 37° C for half an hour. Antibody probed 
with alkaline phosphatase is trapped and substrate NBT (nitro blue tetrazolium) is 
added, that convert enzyme linked to the IgG into a coloured material.

Tissue blot immunoassay (TBIA)

Quick method where the cut tissues are directly pressed on the membrane for 
transferring the antigen and the remaining procedure are similar to DIBA.

Dip stick ELISA 

Nitrocellulose dip stick surfaces coated with specific monoclonal antibody are dipped 
into the sample and the antigens are detected by enzyme labelled virus specific 
antibodies (Darshan et al., 2021).

216

i.  Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate Poly Acrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS PAGE)

It was first introduced by Lamelli in 1970. PAGE is a rapid technique for separation 
and analysis of protein mixtures based on their molecular weight by application 
of electric current. Four winter wheat cultivars (Sepahan, Shirody, Chamran, and 
Marvdasht) that differ in their resistance to powdery mildew were examined for the 
pattern of expression of the pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins transcripts via SDS 
PAGE. SDSPAGE findings revealed 25 bands on gel with high polymorphism in 
practically all genotypes (Kakaei et al., 2010).

ii.  Immunosorbent electron microscopy (ISEM)

Immunofluorescence techniques helps in visualization of the distribution of molecules 
in a sample. Antibodies which are chemically conjugated to fluorescent dyes can 
be used to detect antigen-antibody interactions cytologically with the help of a 
fluorescent microscope after treating the tissues with proper reagents. 

ISEM technique was first used by Derrick in 1973 to detect TMV and PVY. It 
is a combination of electron microscopy and serologyi.e. ,the specificity of serological 
assay added with the visualization capability of electron microscope that provides 
serological and morphological details of the virus. It involves selective trapping of 
virus coated particle on carbon coated grid and adding antibody on virus particle.  
Skaff and Carroll (1995) developed a procedure for purifying barley yellow streak 
mosaic virus in barley and wheat. Polyclonal antibodies were produced from the 
concentrated virus preparations and were used in ELISA and ISEM for detecting 
the viral disease in host plants (Darshan et al., 2021).   

6.  Molecular methods used for detection of plant pathogens

Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and its modifications

PCR is an ingenious tool for molecular biology for identification of plant pathogens. It 
is an in vitro method of nucleic acid synthesis by which a particular segment of DNA 
can be specifically replicated and was invented by Kary Mullis in1987. The double 
stranded DNA of interest is denatured to separate into two individual strands, each 
strand is then allowed to hybridize with a primer (annealing). The primer template 
duplex is used for DNA synthesis with the enzyme DNA polymerase. These three 
steps denaturation, annealing and extension are repeated several cycles to generate 
multiple forms of target DNA. It is simple, sensitive and quick. DNA extraction 
and amplification can be performed in a single day. It has wider applications such 
as mutation screening, genotyping, molecular ecology, molecular epidemiology, 
bioinformatics, genomic cloning, gene expression studies, DNA finger printing, 
genetic mapping etc.

217

6.  Based on the purpose several modifications are made in PCR.

Table 5: Different types of PCR (Powell and Loeffelholz, 2018)

Bio PCR

Inverse PCR

Colony PCR

PCR variants
Immunocapture PCR

Description
Used in concentrating virus particles from plants 
with low virus titre. It involves capturing of virus 
particles by antibodies followed by amplification of 
nucleic acids by RT-PCR.
Used to screen bacterial or yeast clones by picking 
it from an agarose plate followed by adding into 
PCR master mix.
Viable bacterial cells are enriched in solid or liquid 
media and the cell growth is directly used for PCR.
Hot start / Cold finish PCR Prevents  nonspecific  product  amplification  by 
arresting  DNA  polymerase  activity  at  ambient 
temperature.
Detect flanking sequences near genomic inserts by 
a series of DNA digestion and self ligation which 
forms known sequences at either end of unknown 
sequence.
Minimise the nonspecific amplification by gradually 
lowering the annealing temperature as PCR cycle 
progresses. Higher temperature provide greater 
specificity for primer binding and lower temperature 
allows more efficient amplification from the initial 
pcr products.
Used in sequencing and hybridization probing where 
one DNA strand in a double stranded DNA gets 
amplified.
Detect minute quantities at early stage using internal 
probe by tissue fixing and subsequent treatment with 
proteolytic digestion. 
PCR targets small primer binding regions and 
amplifies  conserved  DNA  sequences  such  as 
16SrRNA.
Selective amplification of specific allele based on 
single nucleotide polymorphism between alleles.

Allele specific PCR

Mini primer PCR

Step down PCR

In-situ PCR

Asymmetric

218

Long PCR

Ligation mediated PCR

Rapid  amplification  of 
cDNA ends (RACE)

Reverse transcription PCR 
(RT-PCR)

Nested PCR

Multiplex PCR

Real – time PCR

Two types of polymerases i.e., non proofreading 
and proofreading polymerase together used for 
amplifying long targets.
Small DNA linkers are ligated to DNA of interest 
and multiple primers annealed to DNA linker for 
DNA sequencing and DNA foot printing.
To  analyse  differential  mRNA  splicing  and 
to identify transcription start and end site, it is 
necessary to obtain ends of cDNA sequences using 
known incomplete cDNA sequences.  
To isolate, amplify and identify a known sequence 
from tissue RNA. RNA isolated is converted into 
cDNA followed by PCR amplification. 
Increases  specificity  of  DNA  amplification  by 
reducing non-specific amplification of DNA. Two 
primers are used. With first set of primers the PCR 
products obtained have the intended target and 
other non-specifically amplified DNA fragments. In 
the second reaction, the next set of primer which is 
having binding site partially different from original 
primer but within target DNA fragment is used.  
Performed  for  detecting  various  phytoplasma 
diseases. 
Multiple targets are amplified in a single PCR 
using different sets of primer in a reaction mixture. 
Large number of pathogens can be screened in a 
single reaction.
Used to amplify and simultaneously quantify a target 
DNA molecule. Real time increase in amount of 
DNA can be viewed with help of fluorescent reporter 
molecules like SYBR green.

7.  Isothermal DNA amplification techniques

PCR thermal cycler is required for amplification purpose in majority of genotyping 
techniques. This can be replaced with economical isothermal DNA amplification 
methods.

219

i.  Rolling circle amplification (RCA)

DNA polymerase mediated isothermal enzymatic process in which single stranded 
DNA molecules are synthesized on a short circular ssDNA template by using a 
single DNA primer. RCA was first done for dsDNA Papillomavirus and ssDNA 
Geminivirus (Inoue et al., 2006). 

ii.  Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA)

RPA is a reliable isothermal amplification technique which quickly amplify and 
identify nucleic acids by using the properties of recombinase and related proteins.
Kumar et al., (2018) developed and standardized sensitive, rapid, easy, and cost-effective 
RPA assay for detecting Citrus yellow mosaic virus. Primers are commercialized by 
TwistDx company. Virus identification is performed by adding recombinase which 
aids in primer extension, strand displacing polymerase and protein like single-stranded 
binding protein (SSB) for stabilizing the displaced strands (Londono et al., 2016).

iii.  Loop mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP)

LAMP is a novel, rapid, simple and specific technique that can amplify nucleic acids 
which facilitates diagnosis of plant pathogen. It involves DNA polymerase and a set 
of 4 primers which recognize 6 distinct sequences on target DNA and depends on 
strand displacement activity to produce 109 copies in less than an hour. (Notomi et 
al., 2000).Samples are amplified through two types of elongation reactions occurring 
at the loop regions: self-elongation of templates from the stem loop structure formed 
at the 3’-terminal and the binding and elongation of new primers to the loop region 
(Notomi et al., 2015).It is widely applied for detection of fungi (Fusarium oxysporum 
f. sp. cubense, Li et al., 2013), virus (Banana streak virus, Peng et al., 2012), bacteria 
(Xanthomonas, Hodgetts et al., 2015) and phytoplasma (root wilt of coconut, Nair 
et al., 2016).

iv.  Nucleic acid sequence-based amplification (NASBA)

It is used for the direct amplification of RNA by PCR using a reverse transcriptase, 
RNase H and, T7 RNA polymerase. It is highly sensitive and the end products are 
antisense to target viral sequences. Real time NASBA has been performed to detect 
Strawberry vein banding virus (SVBV, Klerks et al., 2001) and Apple stem pitting virus 
(ASPV, Vaskova et al., 2004).

v.  Strand displacement amplification (SDA)

It is an isothermal, in vitro DNA amplification technique based upon the ability 
of Hinc II to nick the unmodified strand of a hemiphosphorothioate form of its 
recognition site, and the ability of exonuclease deficient klenow (exo-klenow) to 
extend the 3’end at the nick and displace the downstream DNA strand. SDA reactions 

220

involves denaturing of target DNA sample in presence of primers and other reagents 
followed by addition of Hinc II and exo-kle now and finally the sample is incubated 
at 37°C (Walker et al., 1992).

Table 6: Isothermal amplification techniques (Darshan et al., 2021)

Isothermal 
techniques

Target

Primers 
needed

Initial 
heating

Incubation 
temperature 
°C

Limit of 
detection 
(copies)

Amplification 
(min)

NASB

SDA

RPA

RCA

RNA

DNA

DNA

DNA/RNA

2

4

2

1

LAMP

DNA

4-6

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

41

30-55

37-42

30-65

60-65

1

10

1

10

5

60-180

60-120

20-40

60-240

60

8.  Nucleic acid hybridization techniques

Nucleic acid hybridization is a fundamental tool in molecular biology which have the 
capacity of single stranded nucleic acid to form double stranded molecules by standard 
base pairing. It is used for identification of gene of interest using DNA probes, which 
is a short fragment of DNA or RNA of variable length that can be radioactively 
or fluorescently labelled. It can then be used in DNA or RNA samples to detect 
the presence of nucleotide substances that are complementary to the sequence in 
the probe. Hybridization techniques have wide range of applications such as gene 
expression studies, screening specific clone from cDNA, identifying the location of 
gene in a chromosome, determining the pathogens present in a sample etc.

Hybridization technique can be broadly classified into solid support hybridization 
(southern, western, northern and eastern blotting) and In-silica hybridization (FISH 
and microarrays)(Kumar, 2021). 

Southern blotting 

Southern blotting technique was invented by Edwin M southern in 1975. It is a 
method for detection of specific DNA sequence in samples by immobilizingtarget 
DNA fragments into a membrane that have been fractionated by gel electrophoresis. 
DNA fragments separated on agarose gel are denatured, transferred and immobilized 
onto a membrane. The membrane is then exposed to a hybridization probe which is 
a single DNA fragment with a specific sequence whose presence in the target DNA 
is to be determined. The probe DNA is labelled so that it can be detected, usually 
by incorporating radioactivity which is visualized by autoradiography or tagging the 
molecule with a fluorescent or chromogenic dye.

221

Northern blotting

Northern blotting is a variant of southern blotting in which the target nucleic acid is 
RNA instead of DNA. In this technique, the amount and size of RNA transcribed 
from genes and their abundance is estimated. Since most plant virusesare having 
RNA as genetic material, it can be used in plant virus detection. It is used to study 
RNA degradation, half-life and gene expression studies at mRNA level.

Western blotting

It is the common technique widely adopted for the detection and analysis of proteins. 
SDS PAGE is done prior to western blotting where denatured protein mixtures are 
separated and blotted onto nitrocellulose membrane called as protein blotting. Later 
immobilized proteins form complex with specific antibody and the bound antibody 
is detected through different detection methods.

Eastern blotting

It is an extension of biochemical methods of western blotting to analyze lipid, 
carbohydrate epitopes, phosphomoieties and post protein translational modifications 
(Darshan et al., 2021).

Fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH)

It utilizes the combined features of microscopy and hybridization of DNA probes 
and target gene from plant sample. FISH follows the same principle of southern blot 
analysis and the target nuclear DNA is in interphase or metaphase stage. Fluorescent 
probes are prepared followed by denaturation and hybridization of probe and target. 
Finally, the target gene is located either through flow cytometry system or confocal 
fluorescence microscope (Kumar, 2021).

Microarray

DNA microarray also known as gene chip, DNA chip, bio array or gene array is an 
arrangement of thousands of genes fixed on a solid support like glass, silicon chips 
for expression profiling which detects the presence or absence of labelled nucleic 
acids in a sample.It is derived from southern blotting by combining miniaturization, 
automation, fluorescent labelling and parallelism allowing large scale monitoring of 
gene expression simultaneously.DNA microarrays are commonly used formRNA 
profiling, DNA-protein interaction, epigenetic status of genome and sequence 
polymorphism studies(Kumar, 2021).

9.  Molecular markers

Unique DNA sequences, associated with a particular gene or trait found at spe-

222

cific locations of the genome showing polymorphism (base deletion, insertion and 
substitution)  between  different  individuals  and  is  detected  by  certain  molecular 
technology. There are hybridization-based markers and PCR based markers. It can 
be  used  to  study  phylogeny,  evolution,  genome  mapping,  cultivar  identification, 
mapping of R genes and gene pyramiding.

Table 7: Different molecular markers (Darshan et al., 2021) 

Characters

RFLP

RAPD

AFLP

ISSR

SSR

SNP

Gene action

Codominant Dominant

Dominant

Dominant

Codominant Codominant

Reproducibility

High

High

Intermediate M e d i u m -

High

High

Polymorphism

Medium

Very High

High

Required DNA

Medium

High

High

Yes

Cost

Sequencing

PCR requirement No

Less

No

Yes

Low

High

No

Yes

High

High

Low

High

No

Yes

High

Low

High

Yes

Yes

50

High

Low

Variable

Yes

Yes

50

Visualization

Radioactive

Agarose

Agarose

Agarose

Agarose

SNP, VISTA

Required DNA 

10000

20

500-1000

50

(ng)

10.  Advanced phenotypic and genotypic techniques for detecting plant pathogenic 

bacteria

i.  The Biolog system

Biolog is a phenotypic technology based on carbon source utilization that detect 
microbes based on characteristic pattern from discrete test reactions performed within 
a 96 well microplate which use redox chemistry to calorimetrically indicate respiration 
of live suspensions. When a chemical is oxidized, cells reduce a tetrazolium dye, 
forming a purple colour that can be quantified spectrophotometrically at 590 nm. The 
characteristic pattern is called metabolic finger print or community level physiological 
profile (CLPP).Enterobacter cloacaean emerging plant-pathogenic bacterium affecting 
chili pepper seedlings was identified using Biolog assay (Garcia-Gonzalez et al., 2018).

ii.  CABIQ (Classification automatique bacteries identification quarantine)

Rapid technique for detection of phytopathogenic bacteria based on phenotypic 
and genotypic properties of bacteria.It combines traditional identification test and 
molecular methods together. Around 500 reference strain are present in the database 
with conventional phenotypic test and the Biotype 100 galleries. Biotype 100 is a 
product for establishment of nutritional profiles for gram negative bacteria which 

223

contains 100 tubes for studying carbon metabolism (Darshan et al., 2021).

iii.  FAME (Fatty acid methyl ester analysis)

FAME analysis utilizes extracted fatty acid methyl esters for bacterial identification 
based on gas chromatographic analysis.It is produced through trans-esterification, 
where a glyceride reacts with alcohol in presence of alcohol to form fatty acid es-
ters.Every microbe has a unique FAME profile with different quality and quantity 
of fatty acid. The structure of fatty acid varies with 9 to 20 carbon atoms and have 
produced characteristic profile for bacteria, fungi and nematodes. The amount of 
fatty acid present in cytoplasmic membrane and outer membrane of gram-negative 
bacteria are used in taxonomic studies (Kumar, 2021).

iv.  PFGE (Pulsed field gel electrophoresis)

Genotyping  technique  to  detect,  identify  and  classify  genome  of  microbes  and 
mammalian cells accurately. It involves separating large segments of DNA using 
alternate and cross field.Standard DNA gel electrophoresis generally resolves frag-
ments up to ∼50 kb in size, PFGE separates DNA molecules up to 10 Mb. Large 
DNA molecules move in a zig zag form through the gel matrix, and such electro-
phoretic  trajectories  are  disturbed  in  a  size-dependent  manner  by  carefully  ori-
ented  electrical  pulses.  It  is  used  for  typing  of  bacteria,  epidemiological  studies, 
gene mapping in microbesand development of large-insert cloning systems such as 
bacterial and yeast artificial chromosomes (Herschleb et al., 2007).

11.  OMICS – Novel approach for plant disease detection

During the last decade tremendous progress has been witnessed in the field of 
omics technologies which effectively reduced the time for developing better quality 
and disease resistant food crop. The term ‘omics refers to the holistic analysis of the 
biological system involving the acquisition of vast data sets. Major omic technologies 
like genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and phenomics provide 
insights into the complex molecular mechanisms underlying the plant–pathogen 
interactions and aids the discovery of pathogen’s functional components involved in 
the disease. This knowledge can help to unravel the mechanisms by which disease 
resistance is conferred (Zanardo et al. 2019).  It is a system-based approach to unveil 
complex network of interactions between genes, proteins, and metabolites (Raniet 
al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2015).

Genomics

Genomics is the study of the genetic material that constitutes the structure, function 
and expression of all genes in an organism.It uses a combination of recombinant 

224

DNA, DNA sequencing methods, and bioinformatics to sequence, assemble, and 
analyse the structure and function of genomes.By using next generation sequencing 
techniques, a large amount of data is created that helps in faster and cheaper 
sequencing to understand the genome arrangement, biology and evolutionary history 
of thousands of organisms(Goodwin et al., 2016).

Genomics can be further classified into structural and functional genomics. 
Structural genomics unravel the complete DNA sequence of an organism, whereas 
functional genomics uses this genome sequence to assess the functions of genes 
(Leister et al., 2005).RenSeq is a comparative genomics tool to detect nucleotide-
binding leucine-rich repeats (NLR). It was used for identifcation and cloning 
of anti-Phytophthora infestans NLR gene‘Rpi-amr3i’ from a wild potato relative, 
Solanumamericanum. Transgenic potatoes with expression of Rpi-amr3i gene were 
found to be fully resistant to Phytophthorainfestans in greenhouse conditions (Witek 
et al., 2016).

Transcriptomics

The total set of RNA transcripts generated by a person’s genome under specific 
circumstances or in a specific cell is known as their transcriptome. It is studied via 
high-throughput methods, includingmicroarray analysis.Comparison of whole 
transcriptomics data based on RNA-seq enables identification and understanding 
of differentially expressed transcript patterns, novel genes and splice variants in a 
cell (Gao et al., 2013; Loraine et al., 2013; Merican et al., 2019). Most of the plant 
viruses have RNA genome, which is difficult to study using conventional molecular 
biology approaches. Though, with the advent of transcriptomics techniques, such as 
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and Degradome-seq, the knowledge on plant–virus 
interaction has widened enormously (Zanardo et al., 2019).

Proteomics

The proteome is the total set of proteins present in a biological unit, in a specific cell or 
tissue at a particular developmental or cellular phase (Claudia et al., 2018).Proteomes 
present in an organism rely on number of factors, such as plant’s developmental stage, 
response to stress conditions (biotic and abiotic), origin of tissue being examined, and 
the cellular compartments being studied (Renaut et al., 2006; Sergeant and Renaut, 
2010). Hence, proteomics is essential for understanding the molecular mechanisms 
vital to plant growth and development. It involves identification of primary amino acid 
sequence, estimation of their relative amounts, their post-translocation modification 
state, and interaction with other proteins or molecules and characterization of protein 
functions and structures (Barbrer-Brygoo and Joyard, 2004) via different strategies 

225

including functional and structural proteomics, and protein–protein interaction 
(PPI) analysis. Protein expression profile aids to unravel the functions of diverse 
proteins by examining the plant responses to external stimuli, such as disease and 
insect attack (Van Emon, 2016).

Metabolomics

Metabolomics is an evolving field that focuses on comprehensive measurement of 
all metabolites and low molecularweight molecules present within cells, tissues or 
organisms (Castro-Moretti et al., 2020). Metabolome data is generated using two 
main techniques - NuclearMagnetic Resonance (NMR) and Mass Spectrometry 
(MS). Metabolites are the final products of gene expression, which govern the 
phenotype of a plant in a particular physiological condition at the biochemical level. 
Pathogen infected plants modify their metabolome in the infected tissue, i.e., local 
response, and this response can be further extended to other tissues of the plant 
triggering a systemic response. Thus, metabolite profile patterns can deliver a deep 
understanding of the physiological condition and biochemical processes in a plant 
(Fiehn et al., 2000).

Phenomics

Phenome is the set of phenotypes that are produced by an individual over the course 
of growth and development and phenomics refers to the measurement and analysis of 
the phenomes. It permits the quantification of morphological traits that are difficult 
to track visually and non-destructively (Chang et al.,2019). Crop phenotype arises 
from the interaction between the genotype (G) and the environment (E).As the 
environment changes, the complete characterization of phenome is not possible 
(Houle et al., 2010). Statistical analysis is applied to spot these phenotypic variations 
within a genotype. Novel high throughput phenotyping techniques, such as non-
invasive imaging, image analysis, robotics, spectroscopy, and high-performance 
computing, have enabledaccurate and faster phenotypic analysis of crop plants at 
early developmental stages in the natural field conditions as well as in controlled 
laboratory environment.

Bioinformatics

Recent omics technologies have created a large amount of biological data; therefore, 
sophisticated computational analyses are required to draw useful conclusions. 
Bioinformatics involves sequence analysis including identification of genes in DNA 
sequences, identification of families of related sequences, development of models, 
alignment of similar sequences and phylogenetic trees generation for examining the 
evolutionary relationships and discovering all the genes and proteins from a known 

226

sequence (Sidhu et al., 2020). Biological databases are the collection of biological data 
that contain information in an efficient, structured, searchable, updated periodically 
and cross-referenced manner. The webaccessible open-source (http://www.prgdb.org) 
database— ‘PRGdb’ (Osuna-Cruz et al., 2018), provides inclusive overview of plant 
resistance genes. Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST)is a bioinformatics 
software tool for performing sequence alignment and is the quick method for 
identifying specific sequences from large data sets and annotating novel sequences.
DOME is used for management of metabolomic, proteomic and transcriptomic data. 
Metabolomic pathway databases can be accessed through database such as KEGG 
(http:// www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/), MetaCyc (http://metacyc.org/) etc.

12.  Biosensors

It is a self-contained analytical device that incorporates a biologically active material in 
contact with an appropriate transducer for the purpose of detecting the concentration 
or activity of chemical species in any sample. It consists of three main parts i) a 
bioreceptor – which may be an enzyme or any binding molecule, ii) a transducer, 
that transforms the signal resulting from the interaction of the analyte with the 
bioreceptor into a measurable signal and iii) a signal processing system which converts 
the signal into a workable form (Kumar, 2021).

13.  Artificial intelligence

Artificial Intelligence is one of the booming technologies which is ready to create a 
new revolution in the world by making intelligent machines. In this era of modern 
farming, inclusion of artificial intelligence mediated smart technologies for rapid 
detection, accurate diagnosis and real time management of plant diseases will be a 
promising tool for sustainable agriculture. Artificial intelligence can be defined as 
the simulation of human intelligence in machines that are programmed to think 
like humans and mimic their actions. Application of AI techniques for plant disease 
detection can be classified as machine learning and deep learning. Image processing 
is the prerequisite step for both methods (Sujawat and Chouhan, 2021). Selvaraj et al. 
(2019) created an AI-based banana disease and pest detection system using three deep 
convolutional neural networks; ResNet50, InceptionV2 and MobileNetV1. Dataset 
consists of five major diseases (Banana bunchy top, Black sigatoka, Xanthomonas 
wilt in pseudostem, Xanthomonas wilt in fruit) along with their respective healthy 
classes. Both ResNet50 and InceptionV2 models have almost similar performance 
in all the cases compared to MobileNetV1. Based on the study, they developed 
‘Tumaini’ mobile application for global banana farmers. 

227

Conclusion

Plant diseases are responsible for huge yield losses. In a world where total crop failure 
can quickly lead to human misery and starvation, accurate diagnostics play a key role 
in keeping plants free from pathogens. Various phytopathological techniques from 
basics to advanced level discussed in this chapter are applied for early detection, 
diagnosis and management of diseases.The development of omics science and 
technology have opened up numerous avenues for the detailed explanation of the 
molecular mechanisms, pathways, and processes involved in disease development 
and have helped a great deal in the development of methods for disease prevention, 
diagnosis, examination, and management, thus revolutionizing agriculture.

References

Barbrer-Brygoo H, Joyard J (2004) Introduction—focus on plant proteomics. Plant 

Physiol Biochem. 42:913-917.

Burns, R. (2009). Methods in molecular biology. Humana Press.

Castro-Moretti FR, Gentzel IN, Mackey D, Alonso AP (2020) Metabolomics as an 
emerging tool for the study of plant–pathogen interactions. Metabolites 10(2):52

Chang T-G, Chang S, Song Q-F, Perveen S, Zhu X-G (2019) Systems models, phenomics 
and genomics: three pillars for developing high-yielding photosynthetically efcient 
crops. In Silico Plants. https://doi.org/10.1093/insilicoplants/diy003.

Claudia M, Demis AK, Jana V, John H, Nicholas WW, Patrick AL, Rafaele F 
(2018) Genome, transcriptome and proteome: the rise of omics data and their 
integration in biomedical sciences. Brief Bioinform 19(2):286–302. https://
doi.org/10.1093/bib/ bbw114.

Darshan, K., Amrurthalakshmi, M., & Reddy M.G. (2021). Phytopathological 

techniques basic to advances. 

FAO [Food and Agriculture Organization]. 2022. The state of food security and 
nutrition in the world: repurposing food and agricultural policies to make healthy 
diets more affordable [0n-line]. Available: https://www.fao.org/documents/
card/en/c/cc0639en [20 Oct.2022].

Fiehn O, Kopka J, Dörmann P, Altmann T, Trethewey RN, Willmitzer L (2000) 
Metabolite profling for plantfunctional genomics. Nat Biotechnol 18:1157–1161.

Gao Y, Xu H, Shen Y, Wang J (2013) Transcriptomic analysis of rice(Oryza sativa) 
endosperm using the RNA-Seq technique. Plant Mol Biol 81:363–378.

García-González, T., Sáenz-Hidalgo, H. K., Silva-Rojas, H. V., Morales-Nieto, C., 

228

Vancheva, T., Koebnik, R., & Ávila-Quezada, G. D. (2018). Enterobacter cloacae, 
an emerging plant-pathogenic bacterium affecting chili pepper seedlings. The 
plant pathology journal, 34(1), 1.

Goodwin S, McPherson JD, McCombie WR (2016) Coming of age: ten years of 
next-generation sequencing technologies. Nat Rev Genet 17:333–351. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nrg.2016.49.

Herschleb,  J.,  Ananiev,  G.,  &  Schwartz,  D.  C.  (2007).  Pulsed-field  gel 

electrophoresis. Nature protocols, 2(3), 677-684.

Hodgetts, J., Hall, J., Karamura, G., Grant, M., Studholme, D. J., Boonham, 
N., ... & Smith, J. J. (2015). Rapid, specific, simple, in‐field detection of 
Xanthomonas campestris pathovar musacearum by loop‐mediated isothermal 
amplification. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 119(6), 1651-1658.

Houle D, Govindaraju DR, Omholt S (2010) Phenomics: the next challenge. Nat 

Rev Genet 11:855–866.

Hull, R. (2002). Matthew’s plant virology, 4th edn. Academic Press.

Inoue, J., Shigemori, Y., & Mikawa, T. (2006). Improvements of rolling circle 
amplification (RCA) efficiency and accuracy using Thermus thermophilus SSB 
mutant protein. Nucleic acids research, 34(9), e69-e69.

Jayaraman, J. and Verma, J. P. (2002). Fundamentals of plant bacteriology. Kalyani publishers.

Jeong, J. J., Ju, H. J., & Noh, J. (2014). A review of detection methods for the plant 

viruses. Research in Plant Disease, 20(3), 173-181.

Kakaei, M., Kahrizi, D., & Mostafaie, A. (2010). Study on powdery mildew disease 
related proteins expression in winter wheat cultivars via SDS-PAGE. Biharean 
Biologist, 4(2), 169-171.

Klerks, M. M., Leone, G., Lindner, J. L., Schoen, C. D., & Van den Heuvel, J. F. J. 
M. (2001). Rapid and sensitive detection of Apple stem pitting virus in apple 
trees through RNA amplification and probing with fluorescent molecular 
beacons. Phytopathology, 91(11), 1085-1091.

Kumar A, Pathak RK, Gupta SM, Gaur VS, Pandey D (2015) Systems biology for 
smart crops and agricultural innovation: flling the gaps between genotype and 
phenotype for complex traits linked with robust agricultural productivity and 
sustainability. Omics J Integr Biol 19(10):581–60.

Kumar, P. (2021). Biophysics and molecular biology tools and techniques. Pathfinder 

publication.

229

Kumar, P. V., Sharma, S. K., Rishi, N., Ghosh, D. K., & Baranwal, V. K. (2018). An 
isothermal based recombinase polymerase amplification assay for rapid, sensitive 
and robust indexing of citrus yellow mosaic virus. Acta Virol, 62(1), 104-108. 

Leister D (2005) Plant functional genomics. Food Products Press, New York.

Li, B., Du, J., Lan, C., Liu, P., Weng, Q., & Chen, Q. (2013). Development of a loop-
mediated isothermal amplification assay for rapid and sensitive detection of Fusarium 
oxysporum f. sp. cubense race 4. European Journal of Plant Pathology, 135, 903-911.

Londoño, M. A., Harmon, C. L., & Polston, J. E. (2016). Evaluation of recombinase 
polymerase amplification for detection of begomoviruses by plant diagnostic 
clinics. Virology journal, 13, 1-9.

Loraine AE, McCormick S, Estrada A, Patel K, Qin P (2013) RNA-seq of Arabidopsis 
pollen uncovers novel transcription and alternative splicing. Plant Physiol 
162:1092–1109.

Mann, S. K., Kashyap, P. L. and Kang, S. S. (2010). Plant Pathology – A competitive 

vision. Kalyani publishers.

Merican AF, Mirsafan H, Ripen AM, Mohamad SB (2019) Studies of Body Systems. 
In: Ranganathan S, Gribskov M, Nakai K, Sch nbach C (eds) Encyclopedia of 
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, vol. 3, pp 94–102.

Nair, S., Manimekalai, R., Ganga Raj, P., & Hegde, V. (2016). Loop mediated 
isothermal amplification (LAMP) assay for detection of coconut root wilt disease 
and arecanut yellow leaf disease phytoplasma. World Journal of Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 32, 1-7.

Notomi, T., Mori, Y., Tomita, N., & Kanda, H. (2015). Loop-mediated isothermal 
amplification (LAMP): principle, features, and future prospects. Journal of 
microbiology, 53(1), 1-5.

Notomi, T., Okayama, H., Masubuchi, H., Yonekawa, T., Watanabe, K., Amino, N., 
& Hase, T. (2000). Loop-mediated isothermal amplification of DNA. Nucleic 
acids research, 28(12), e63-e63. 

Osuna-Cruz CM, Paytuvi-Gallart A, Donato AD, Sundesha V, Andolfo G, Cigliano 
RA et al (2018) PRGdb 3.0: a comprehensive platform for prediction and 
analysis of plant disease resistance genes. Nucleic Acids Res 46:D1197–D1201. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/ nar/gkx1119.

Peng, J., Fan, Z., & Huang, J. (2012). Rapid detection of Banana streak virus by 
loop‐mediated isothermal amplification assay in South China. Journal of 
Phytopathology, 160(5), 248-250.

230

Powell, E. A., & Loeffelholz, M. (2018). PCR and its variations. In advanced 

techniques in diagnostic microbiology (pp.327-346). Springer, Cham.

Rani, M., Mangat, H. K., Pathak, R. K., & Yadav, I. S. (2021). Harnessing the 
potential of omics for prevention and management of the complex crop plant’s 
diseases. Journal of Proteins and Proteomics, 12(3), 227-245.

Renaut J, Hausman JF, Wisniewski ME (2006) Proteomics and low temperature studies: 
bridging the gap between gene expression and metabolism. Physiol Plant 126:97–109.

Selvaraj, M. G., Vergara, A., Ruiz, H., Safari, N., Elayabalan, S., Ocimati, W., and 
Blomme, G. (2019). AI-powered banana diseases and pest detection. Plant 
Methods. 15(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13007-019-0475-z.

Sergeant K, Renaut J (2010) Plant biotic stress and proteomics. Current Proteomics 

7(4):275–297.

Sidhu KS, Bhangu SK, Pathak RK, Yadav IS, Chhuneja P (2020) Identifcation 
of natural lead compounds for leaf rust of Wheat: a molecular docking and 
simulation study. J Proteins Proteom 11(4):283–295.

Skaf, J. S., & Carroll, T. W. (1995). Purification of barley yellow streak mosaic virus 
and detection by DAS-ELISA and ISEM using polyclonal antibodies. Plant 
disease, 79(10), 1003-1007.

Sujawat, G. S. (2021). Application of Artificial Intelligence in detection of diseases 
in plants: A Survey. Turkish Journal of Computer and Mathematics Education 
(TURCOMAT), 12(3), 3301-3305.

Van Emon JM (2016) The omics revolution in agricultural research. J Agric Food 

Chem 64:36–44. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc. 5b04515.

Vašková, D., Špak, J., Klerks, M. M., Schoen, C. D., Thompson, J. R., & Jelkmann, 
W. (2004). Real-time NASBA for detection of Strawberry vein banding 
virus. European Journal of Plant Pathology, 110, 213-221.

Walker, G. T., Fraiser, M. S., Schram, J. L., Little, M. C., Nadeau, J. G., & Malinowski, 
D. P. (1992). Strand displacement amplification—an isothermal, in vitro DNA 
amplification technique. Nucleic acids research, 20(7), 1691-1696.

Witek K, Jupe F, Witek AI, Baker D, Clark MD, Jones JDG (2016) Accelerated 
cloning of a potato late blight-resistance gene using RenSeq and SMRT 
sequencing. Nat Biotechnol 34:656–660.

Zanardo LG, de Souza GB, Alves MS (2019) Transcriptomics of plant– virus 
interactions: A review.Theor Exp Plant Physiol 31:103. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40626-019-00143-z.

231

15

Dissemination and Survival

of the Plant Pathogens

Vikram Singh1 and Ashwani Kumar2 
1Ph.D. Research Scholar, Department of Plant Pathology, Chaudhary Charan Singh 
Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar - 125004 (Haryana) 
2Assistant Professor, Department of Plant Pathology, Chaudhary Charan Singh 
Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar - 125004 (Haryana)  

Abstract

Plant pathogens pose a serious danger to global food security and causes huge annual 
yield loss of crops around the world. The initial step in the infection chain or disease 
cycle of plant pathogens is the means of survival. Both the terms “primary infection” 
and “primary inoculum” refer to the initial infection that develops as a result of 
the pathogen’s sources of survival in the crop (infected hosts serving as inoculum 
reservoirs, saprophytic survival outside the host, dormant spores and other structures 
in or on the host or outside the host). The spores or other pathogen structures act as 
sources of secondary inoculums and secondary infections, which spread the illness 
throughout the field, after the disease has started to harm the crop. The spread of 
plant pathogens is the second link in the infection cycle. Dispersal, dispersion or 
transmission of plant pathogens refers to the movement of spores or infectious 
materials functioning as inoculum from one host to another host at varying distances 
that causes the disease to spread. The spread of the pathogen or illness is crucial 
for the continuation of the pathogen’s life cycle and its evolution as well as for the 
spread of plant diseases. For successful management of plant diseases, it is crucial 
to understand these techniques of pathogen survival and spread since it is possible 
to stop these processes and breaking the chain of infection.

Keywords: Plant Pathogens, survival, dissemination, primary infection, disease cycle

232

Introduction

The majority of plant pathogens have evolved effective strategies for surviving during 
the unfavourable season of the year in order to maintain the infection chain, so that 
its infection might be revived when the favourable season arrives. Plant pathogen’s 
main sources of survival include living hosts that are infected, contaminated or 
infected planting organs, crop residues, resting structures and soil. It is possible for 
Phythophthora infestans to persist in living host tissue, such as seed tubers, cull piles 
and volunteer potatoes that remain the winter in the field, Shinners et al. (2003), on 
other solanaceous plants and in the soil (Kirk et al., 2013). Primary inoculum (PI), 
which is present in the soil, produces primary infection of the crop from healthy seed 
whereas infected tubers convey the infection to the field. The PI may also travel vast 
distances or from nearby areas by wind. The fungus then spreads spores on leaves. 
When these spores touch healthy plant surfaces, they spread by wind and water and 
start new diseases. This infection is a secondary one. 

The disease is brought on by the main infection and it is disseminated by the 
secondary infection. Mycelium and conidia from the rice blast disease overwintered 
on straw, seeds, and collateral hosts including Eleusine coracana, E. indica, Panicum 
sp., Setaria sp. and others, serving as the main source of inoculums (Bhandari et al., 
2017). Rhizoctonia solani is a soil and seed borne pathogen that survives in tropical 
conditions by developing sclerotia and mycelia in contaminated soil or seeds. Infected 
plant debris from weed or rice hosts is the main vector of the disease in soil (Figure 
1). Sclerotia carried by crop residue and soil serve as the main source of inoculum in 
temperate zones, and they can spread from one field to another through irrigation 
water (Senapati et al., 2022). In the rice growing season, the bacterium that causes 
bacterial blight (Xanthomonas oryzae pv oryzae) persists in the roots of the weed 
“Leersia haxandra” from there, reaching the rice nursery beds and spreading further 
in the channels by the irrigation water applied to the young plants. In addition, the 
disease could enter the rice nursery by infected seeds or field found infected straw 
(Mizukami and Wakimoto, 1969).

233

Fig. 1 Disease cycle of sheath blight of rice caused by Rhizoctonia solani

 Senapati et al., 2022

After getting to the young rice seedlings, the pathogen begins to accumulate 
on the root surface and moves up towards the crown by using the metabolites, which 
typically ooze out from rice plant roots, for their proliferation (Mizukami, 1961). It is 
referred to as “dispersal” or “dissemination” when a plant pathogen spreads within the 
general region in which it is already established. When a fungus is actively growing 
vegetatively inside or on top of its host tissues, it produces both asexual and sexual 
spores, which are then mechanically distributed throughout time and space by a variety 
of methods. Infection of the mid-rib, lamina, leaf sheath, and stalk arises from the 
secondary transmission of the sugarcane red rot disease-causing fungus during the 
monsoon, which is mediated by irrigation, rain water, and rain splash. In the winter, 
air currents support the pathogen’s spread (Sharma and Tamta, 2020). In bacterial 
diseases, the bacterial cells manifest as oozing on the host’s surface or they may cause 
tissue breakdown, exposing the bacterial mass, which is then spread by a variety of 
physical and biological agents. Seeds, fungi, nematodes, insects and phanerogamic 
plant parasites are examples of external agents that might help transmit plant viruses 
(Van Regenmortel et al., 2000). Only a few plant viruses are transferred by humans 
via operational processes such vegetative plant multiplication, interculture activities, 
transportation of infected material from one location to another and introduction 
of new crops or varieties in current or new geographic areas. The majority of plant 

234

viruses are spread by insect vectors. The two components of an animate pathogen’s 
infection chain, namely the pathogen’s ability to survive in latent structures and 
its ability to spread, are inextricably linked. Actually, the dormant structures offer 
a way of dispersion over time since they allow the disease to remain viable for an 
extended length of time and travel through physical mediums unharmed. This chapter 
describes many ways that plant infections can survive and spread, which will aid in 
understanding and control of plant diseases.

Survival of Plant Pathogens

The initial step in an infection chain or disease cycle is the means of survival. When 
a crop becomes infected for the first time, it is referred to as having a primary 
infection or primary inoculum. These sources of pathogen survival include infected 
hosts that serve as inoculum reservoirs, saprophytic organisms that survive outside 
of host, dormant spores, and other structures that can survive for long periods of 
time inside or outside of host.

Sources of Survival of Pathogens:

1) Infected host as reservoir of inoculum (or) survival in vital association with living 
plants.

2) Survival as saprophytes outside the host.

3) Survival by means of specialized resting structures in or on the host or outside 
the host.

4) Survival in association with insects, nematodes and fungi.

1) Infected host as reservoir of inoculum:

The infected host serving as reservoir of active inoculum is grouped into:

a) Seed: Plant diseases can infect seeds either externally or internally as they develop 
and mature into fruits or pods. A seed-borne disease is loose smut. The infected seed 
contains the fungus systemically. When contaminated seed is sown, it grows into a 
seedling and the fungus spreads throughout the body, colonising meristemic tissue. 
The mycelia mature when spikes form, resulting in smutted heads (Abrahim, 2019).

b) Collateral hosts / Alternative hosts (wild hosts of same families): Collateral 
hosts are plant species that are vulnerable to plant diseases that affect crop plants 
and can support the growth and reproduction of these pathogens off-season. In this 
way, the weed hosts facilitate the transition between two crop seasons. Pyricularia 
grisea, the fungus that causes rice blast disease, can thrive during the off-season of 
the rice crop and infect grass weeds like Brachiaria mutica, Dinebra retroflexa, Leersia 

235

hexandra and Panicum repens. The conidia (inoculum) released from the weed host 
and spread by the wind as soon as a new rice crop is planted infect the new rice 
crop (Kumar et al., 2021).

c) Alternate hosts (Wild hosts of other families): The function of collateral hosts is 
more significant than that of alternate hosts. But when a pathogen has a very broad 
host range (like Sclerotium rolfsii, Rhizoctonia solani, Fusarium moniliforme etc.) and 
is adaptable to a wide range of environmental conditions, the disease’s alternate hosts 
become a crucial part of its survival. For the heteroecious rust pathogens to complete 
their life cycle, these alternative hosts are crucial. For instance, the barberry bush 
(Berberis vulgaris), which serves as the alternate host of Puccinia graminis tritici (the 
pathogen that causes black or stem rust on wheat), survives alongside the cultivated 
host in temperate zones (Kumar et al., 2021). This wild host, which belongs to a 
separate family, is crucial to the fungus’ survival in such conditions.

d) Self sown crops: Numerous plant pathogens accumulate in crops that are self-
sown, planted voluntarily, and planted early. The pathogen (Rice tungro virus) and 
vector (Nephottetix virescens) are both present in self-sown rice plants.

2) Survival as saprophytes outside the host:

Many plant pathogens have the potential to live saprophytically, which allows them 
to persist in the absence of host plants. Typically, saprophytic life exists in or on the 
soil. Fungi can exist without the cultivated host plant as saprophytes and fall into 
one of three categories for study:

(i) Soil inhabitants: Organisms that persist permanently in the soil without their host 
plant called saprophytes. For instance, Pythium, Rhizoctonia and Sclerotium species.

        (ii) Root inhabitants: These are more specialised parasites that coexist closely 
with their hosts in soil to live. As long as the host tissue in which they are residing 
as parasites has not entirely disintegrated, the active saprophytic phase continues. 
Examples include the Fusarium, Verticillium and cotton root rot (Phymatotrichum 
omnivorum) fungus that cause vascular wilt.

(iii) Rhizosphere colonizers: More resilient to soil hostility are the organisms that 
colonise the dead substrates in the root region and stay there for an extended period 
of time. For illustration, Cladosporium fulvum, a tomato leaf mould.

3) Survival as dormant spores or specialized resting structures:

Plant viruses have no resting stage and are transmitted through a continuous 
infection chain.

Phytopathogenic bacteria: Additionally, the plant bacteria do not create dormant 

236

spores or other comparable structures. They continue to exist in either their active 
saprophytic stage on the remains of dead plants or their active parasitic stage in the 
current host.

Nematodes: Both the active parasitic phase on a living host and the dormant 
structures, such as eggs, cysts, and galls, generated in host tissues, allow them to 
persist ( Jones et al., 2013). These structures might be found in seed lots or in the soil.

Phanerogamic parasites: Through seeds, they can endure in a dormant form for 
many years. Orobanchae seeds can remain in the soil for up to 7 years ( Joel et al., 
2007). Fungi are the only organisms among plant pathogens that create spores, which 
are similar to nematode eggs, and other resting structures for their inactive survival. 
The following categories can be applied to these dormant structures of survival.

1) Soil borne fungi:

a) Dormant spores: Conidia (Peach leaf curl pathogen, Taphrina deformans) (Akbar 
et al., 2023), Chlamydospores (Wilt pathogen, Fusarium sp.), oospores (Downy 
mildew fungi), perithecia (Apple scab pathogen, Venturia inaequalis) etc.

b) Other dormant structures include thickened hypha, sclerotia, microsclerotia and 
rhizomorphs (Armillaria mellea), as well as sclerotinia sclerotiorum, which causes 
cottony rot. Hyphae that are thickened Sclerotia Rhizomorphs Microsclerotia

c) Physical factors (such as high temperatures, radiation, desiccation and anaerobiosis), 
chemical factors (such as antibiotics and antagonistic chemicals produced by other 
microbes) and biotic factors (such as parasitism and predation by microflora and 
microfauna) are all factors that can affect a pathogen’s ability to survive in soil.

2) Seed borne fungi:

a) Externally seed borne: spores that are dormant on the seed coat Ex: Covered smut 
of barley, grain smut of jowar, bunt of wheat etc (Martin et al., 2022).

b) Internally seed borne: Under the seed coat or in the embry, dormant mycelium 
using wheat as an example, loose smut (Ustilago nuda tritici) (Abrahim et al., 2019).

c) Factors affecting the survival of the pathogen on/in the seed are temperature 
and moisture.

3) Dormant fungal structures on dormant or active host 

In grapevine downy mildew, apple powdery mildew, etc. The mycelium of the fungus 
may be present in a dormant form in the damaged twigs, or its oospores or perithecia 
may be entrenched in the tissues of the affected organs. In addition to using eggs, 
cysts, and larvae of plant parasitic nematodes as over seasoning structures, parasitic 

237

phanerogams can also persist as seeds ( Jones et al., 2013).

4) Survival in association with insects, nematodes and fungi

Numerous significant plant pathogens could live and overwinter inside an insect’s 
body. According to Wielkopolan et al. (2021), the corn flea beetle is thought to 
be the primary vector for the acquisition and transmission of Pantoea stewartii. 
Nematodes or fungi found in the soil help plant viruses including wheat mosaic, 
tobacco necrosis, tobacco rattle, and tobacco ringspot viruses live in between crop 
seasons. The nematode Xiphinema americana is connected to tobacco ringspot. The 
viruses are carried internally by the fungus Polymyxa graminis (Wheat soil borne 
mosaic and Barley yellow mosaic) and Spongospora subterranea (Potato mop top 
virus) and are spread by the dormant spore (Campbell, 1996).

Dispersal of Plant Pathogens 

A pathogen’s primary and secondary inoculum must be spread from the source of 
survival to the vulnerable sections of a healthy plant in order for it to infect it. It is 
referred to as “dispersal” or “dissemination” when a plant pathogen spreads within 
the general region in which it is already established. Dispersal or spread of the 
inoculum can occur when it is moved a little distance or a great distance. However, 
the dissemination of pathogens is essential for the continuation of the life cycle 
and the evolution of the pathogen as well as the spread of diseases. The dispersal of 
infectious plant pathogens in space occurs through two ways:

1. Autonomous or direct or active dispersal.

2. Indirect or passive dispersal

1. Autonomous or direct or active dispersal

According to this strategy, plant infections spread through soil, seed, and planting 
materials during routine agronomic activities. Insects, wind, water, etc. play little to 
no significant influence in this sort of dissemination.

(i) Seed as the means of autonomous dispersal: The migration of pathogens and the 
transmission of diseases are significant since the bulk of farmed crops are developed 
from seed. Cuscuta seeds, ergot fungus sclerotia, smut, sori, and other dormant 
structures of the disease are found in seed lots and dispersed as seed contaminants. 
The bacterial cells or fungal spores that are found on the seed coat, such as in the 
smuts of barley, sorghum, etc., can travel great distances. The seed contains the latent 
mycelium of many fungus, which is widely dispersed. There are three different ways 
that seeds are dispersed: internally, externally, and through contaminated seed.

238

(a) Seed contamination: Seed-borne pathogens avoid direct contact with crop 
seeds that are still viable by passing through seed lots as separate contaminants. The 
seeds of the virus or parasite and the host are mixed together during crop harvest. 
Differentiating between pathogen seeds and host seeds can frequently be difficult. 
For example, rye ergot and pearl millet smut. Smut sori and ergots are easily mixed 
with the seed lots during harvest and threshing (Miedaner and Geiger, 2015).

(b) Externally seed borne: Close contact between the structure of the pathogen 
and seeds is established when it embeds itself on the seed coat as dormant spores 
or bacteria during crop growth or at the time of harvest and threshing. For instance, 
cotton with bacterial blight, short or loose sorghum, etc. Outwardly seed-borne 
organisms, such as the smut spores present in many diseases, have an inbuilt capacity 
for extended life and can survive for many years. Ex: According to Williams et al. 
(1971), the spores of Tilletia caries, also known as the stinking smut of wheat, and 
Ustilago avenae, also known as the smut of oats, are still viable after 18 and 13 years, 
respectively.

(c) Internally seed borne: The embryo may become infected by the pathogen while it 
is still developing in the ovary. They become internally seed-borne. A good example 
is loose wheat smut (Kumar et al., 2021).

Differentiate Seed infection and infestation

Seed infection: Only until the pathogen has made a connection with the tissues 
of the seed and has grown in or on it for some time can a seed become infected. 
For example, in loose smut of wheat, the fungus grows in the embryo’s tissues and 
becomes dormant when the seed enters dormancy.
Seed infestation: The seed is contaminated and only acts as a carrier for the disease 
when the fungus or pathogen is present on the seed coat and in the seed lot.

(ii) The use of soil for autonomous dispersal: Parasites or facultative saprophytes 
that reside in the soil may do this. The pathogen may disperse through the soil, by 
developing there, or by moving soil contaminated with it. The former is referred to 
as dispersal in soil, whereas the later is referred to as dispersal by soil.

The three steps of dispersal in soil are as follows: 

Dispersal in soil: 

(a) Soil contamination: The pathogen infects the soil as it slowly travels from an 
infected region to a new one.

(b) Growth and spread of a pathogen in soil: Once a pathogen has entered the soil, 
depending on its ability for multiplication and dissemination, it may grow and spread. 

239

The most important characteristics of the pathogen are its potential for saprophytic 
survival and its aptitude to adapt to the soil environment. A pathogen’s ability to 
survive is influenced by a variety of characteristics, including high growth rates, rapid 
spore germination, increased enzymatic activity, the capacity to create antibiotics, 
and tolerance to antibiotics produced by other soil-microorganisms.

The three different types of pathogens in soil can be distinguished based on this 
competitive saprophytic activity. In the absence of host plants, specialised facultative 
parasites (Saprophytes) can survive in soil, but they are more dependent on the host 
plant’s leftovers (e.g., Armillariella mellea, Ophiobolous graminis etc.). Facultative 
parasites without specialisation can live their entire lives in the soil (Pythium sp., 
and Phytophthora sp.) (Barton, 1957). The presence of an active host is necessary 
for soil-borne obligatory parasites like Syncytium endobioticum and Plasmodiophora 
brassicae. The diseases remain in the soil as dormant organisms such as oospores 
(Pythium, Phytophthora, Sclerospora, etc.), Chlamydospores (Fusarium), smut spores 
(Ustilago) (Barton, 1957) and sclerotia (Rhizoctonia, Sclerotium).

Dispersal by the soil

The pathogen is spread by the soil during agricultural operations using tools, irrigation 
water, employees’ feet, etc. As a result, plant debris containing bacterial and fungal 
infections as well as fungus propagules spread over the field (Beaumont, 1954). 
Transporting soil and materials for disease proliferation from one place to another is 
the most important method of disease transmission. For instance, relocating papaya 
seedlings from a nursery where Pythium ophiodermatid, the pathogen in responsible 
for papaya stem or foot rot, is present, may spread the infection to newly excavated 
pits where the seedlings will be planted. Similar to this, fruit tree grafts that are 
shipped with dirt surrounding their roots may spread diseases present in the nursery 
to the orchards (Baker, 1959).  

(iii) The plant and its organs as a method of self-sufficient dispersal: 

Plants, plant components other than seeds used for vegetative growth, unprocessed 
field output, and plant debris that accumulates during cropping make up the third way 
of autonomous dissemination. For instance, Shinners et al. (2003) used seed tubers 
from the potato’s original source to spread late blight. California was first exposed 
to citrus canker by Asian immigrants. California’s environment was favourable for 
the outbreak there.  

(II) Passive or indirect dispersal: 

Plant pathogens can spread passively through both living and non-living entities. 

240

(i) Insects: Insects either outwardly (epizoic) or inside (internally) transport plant 
diseases (endozoic). They have the ability to spread bacterial, fungal, viral, mycoplasmic, 
spiroplasmic, rickettsial, etc. 

Fungal diseases: 

Particularly significant in terms of external transmission are the fungi that generate 
conidia, oidia, and spermatia in honey secretions with seductive smells. Sorghum 
sugary disease for example. Fly, pollinating bees, and wasps that are used for both 
pollination and the transfer of plant pathogens are attracted to the ascomycetes’ 
spermatial oozings at the entrance of the spermagonia. Internally, elm bark bugs 
are carriers of Dutch elm disease (Ceratostomella ulmi) (Wielkopolan et al., 2021).  

Bacterial diseases: 

Flies (bees), ants, and leaf miners, respectively, disseminate the fire blight organism 
(Erwinia amylovora) and the citrus canker bacteria (Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. 
citri) (Anderson, 1924). The bacteria Erwinia tracheiphila that causes cucumber 
wilt (Diabrotica undecimipunctata) is spread by both the spotted cucumber beetle 
(Acalymma vittata) and the striped cucumber beetle (Acalymma vittata) (Wielkopolan 
et al., 2021). The bacterium contaminates the mouthparts, moves to the beetle’s gut, 
and spends the winter within the beetle while the beetles eat on the infected plant. 
Thus, the beetle helps the bacteria in two ways: by facilitating their survival and by 
facilitating their spread.

Viral diseases: 

Insect vectors like aphids, whiteflies, leafhoppers, thrips, beetles, mealybugs and 
mites are responsible for transmitting the majority of plant viruses. Aphids are by 
far the most prevalent insect vector of plant viruses. Approximately 55% of the 
viruses that cause illness in plants are transmitted by the more than 200 species of 
aphids that have been identified as plant-virus vectors, as shown in Table 1. However, 
other vectors transmitted lesser amounts of plant viruses, these include leafhoppers 
(11%), beetles (11%), whiteflies (9%), most of these whitefly-transmitted viruses 
are begomoviruses (family Geminiviridae), although whiteflies are also vectors of 
criniviruses, ipomoviruses, torradoviruses, and some carlaviruses (Castillo  et al., 
2011), as shown in Table 2, nematodes (7%), fungi and plasmodiophorids (5%), and 
thrips, mites, or mealybugs (2%) (Astier et al., 2001).

241

1

3

4

2

9

8

2

3

1

2

5

7

8

Table 1: Aphid-transmitted plant viruses of different families and modes of 
transmission

S. 
No.

Family

Genus

Virus

No. of 
Spp.

Mode of 
Transmission

Bromoviridae Alfamovirus

Alfalfa mosaic virus

Noncirculative

Bromoviridae Cucumovirus

Cucumber mosaic virus Nonpersistent

Comoviridae

Fabavirus

Potyviridae

Macluravirus

Broad bean wilt virus-1

Maclura mosaic virus

Potyviridae

Potyvirus

91

Potato virus Y

Caulimoviridae Caulimovirus

Cauliflower  mosaic 
virus

Noncirculative

Closteroviridae Closterovirus

Beet yellows virus

Semipersistent

Sequiviridae

Sequivirus

Sequiviridae Waikavirus

Luteoviridae

Enamovirus

Luteoviridae

Luteovirus

Luteoviridae

Polerovirus

Luteoviridae

Umbravirus

Rhabdoviridae Cytorhabdovirus

Parsnip  yellow  fleck 
virus

Anthriscus yellows 
virus

Pea enation mosaic 
virus 1

Barley yellow dwarf 
virus

Potato leafroll virus

Carrot mottle virus

Lettuce necrotic 
yellows virus

Sonchus yellow net 
virus

Circulative

Nonpropagative

Circulative

Propagative

10

Rhabdoviridae Nucleorhabdovirus 7

Ng et al., 2004

Table 2: Whitefly transmitted plant viruses

S. No. Virus family

Virus genus Whitefly

Mode of transmission

Betaflexiviridae Carlavirus

Bemisia tabaci

Nonpersistent/semipersistent

Closteroviridae

Crinivirus

Bemisia afer

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1

2

Trialeurodes abutilonea Semipersistent

B. tabaci

Trialeurodes 
vaporariorum

Semipersistent

Semipersistent

Semipersistent

Trialeurodes ricini

Unknown

3

Geminiviridae

Begomovirus B. tabaci

Persistent nonpropagative

242

Source: Lapidot et al., 2014
Mycoplasma diseases: 

4

5

Potyviridae

Secoviridae

Ipomovirus

B. tabaci

Torradovirus B. tabaci

Semipersistent

Undetermined

Plant MLOs are found in the phloem, and MLOs are transferred to other plants 
by insects that feed on phloem. Leaf hoppers are the main vector for the spread of 
mycoplasmal diseases. In the field, the Sesamum phyllody phytoplasma is reported 
to be transmitted by leaf hopper, Orosius albicinctus Distant (Prasad and Sahambi, 
1982) and Hishimonus phycitis Distant (Nabi et al., 2015).

Nematodes: 

Numerous nematodes operate as carriers of fungi, viruses and bacteria. Bacterial 
diseases: The ear cockle worm Anguina tritici disperses the bacteria Corynebacterium 
tritici or Clavibacter tritici, which causes wheat yellow ear rot. When these two 
pathogens co-occur, a complicated condition known as Tundu of wheat emerges. 
Corynebacterium tritici cannot spread or cause infection unless Anguina tritici carries 
it (Gupta and Swarup, 1972). 

Fungal diseases: Nematodes also spread fungi that cause root rot and wilt, including 
Phytophthora, Fusarium, Rhizoctonia, Verticillium, etc., (Armstrong and Armstrong, 
1948). Plant nematodes are essential in the transmission of some viral infections. The 
nematodes are known to spread a variety of soil-borne viruses. The Dorylaimoidea 
nematode genus Xiphenema, Longidorous, Trichodorus and Paratrichodorus are known 
to spread plant viruses. Nematode transmitted polyhedral viruses (NEPO) and 
nematode transmitted tubular (NETU) viruses are the two types of nematode 
transmitted viruses based on the shape of their particles (Brown et al., 1995). 

NEPO  viruses: Polyhedral virus particles that are transmitted by nematodes. They 
are typically spread by Xiphenema and Longidorous species. For instance, the viruses 
that cause tobacco ringspot, tomato ringspot, tomato black ring and arabis mosaic 
(Brown et al., 1995). 

NETU viruses are tubular-particled nematode-transmitted viruses. Trichodorus and 
Paratrichodorus spread NETU viruses. For instance, tobacco rattling virus and pea 
early browning virus (Trichodorus sp). e.g., Trichodorus pachydermis (Brown et al., 1995). 

(ii) Humans: When it comes to the transmission of plant pathogens, humans have a 
more direct than indirect impact. Some of the methods and tactics used by humans 
for spreading assistance are listed below.

Seed trade: Without taking the required precautions, importing and exporting 

243

contaminated seeds causes diseases to spread from one country or continent to another. 
Diseases that are disseminated through seed and propagation materials or on them 
typically do so in this manner. Plant viruses have been accidentally transmitted by 
humans for as long as people have collected and carried seeds to new locations. It 
took a long time for this technique of distribution to be recognised. In 1699, Hellwig 
first noticed that outbreaks of ergot (Claviceps purpurea) on rye followed the sowing 
of ergot infected seeds (Baker and Smith, 1966).

Planting contaminated seed: The propagation of pathogens from field to field, 
orchard to orchard, locality to locality, or country to country is aided by the planting 
of contaminated bulbs, bulbils, corms, tubers, rhizomes, cuttings, etc. of vegetatively 
propagated plants like potato, sweet potato, cassava, sugarcane, banana, many 
ornamentals and fruit trees, etc. Humans involved in preparational cultivation, 
planting, watering, weeding, trimming, etc., spread plant diseases when utilising 
conventional farming methods. Spores and other external structures of fungi can be 
transported from plant to plant and from field to field on workers’ clothing, shoes, 
hands and other materials (Berry and Davis, 1957).

Through the use of contaminated tools: When used in the field for various 
cultural operations (weeding, thinning, hoeing, etc.), contaminated instruments have 
the potential to transmit pathogens from one area to another. For instance, wilt and 
root rot are soil-borne illnesses. The movement of seeds from one plant to another 
is facilitated by the use of pruning and cutting knives on plants like banana with a 
bunched-up top for example. 

By employing contaminated grafting and budding material: Grafting and 
budding between healthy and sick plants is the most effective method of spreading 
infections among horticulture crops.  
(iii) Phanerogamic parasite dispersal: Dodders spread numerous economically 
significant plant viruses. Dodder establishes close biological contact through its 
haustoria, acting as a bridge between the diseased host plant and the healthy host 
plant. Plant virus transmission most likely includes the interaction of host and dodder 
cells. Tomato ring spot virus is transmitted by Cuscuta gronovii (Welliver, 1992) 
Cuscuta spp. transmits apple mosaic virus (Yarwood, 1955). 

(iv) Birds: Certain fungi and parasite seeds that are flowering are dispersed by birds. 
Crows in the tropics devour the meaty, sticky and gelatinous berries of gaint mistletoe 
(Dendrophthoe sp.), then scatter the seeds on other trees with their waste. Loranthus 
seeds are dispersed by birds by their faeces and attachment to their beaks (Singh 
et al., 2016). While constructing their nests, birds transport pieces of dodder stem, 
enabling them to move to other areas. According to Scharf and Depalma (1981), 

244

birds disperse the Endothea parasitica spores that cause chestnut blight.

(v) Domesticated and wild animals: Domesticated animals (cattle) die after ingesting 
live fungus propagules (spores, oospores or sclerotia) when eating diseased feed. 
This faeces serves as an inoculum source when utilised as manure and spread on the 
ground. Moreover, animals’ legs and hooves can be used to transport soil-dwelling 
fungus, notably sclerotia.

Spread by some Non-living Entities

(i) Wind: The  scientific  word  for  the  wind-borne  transmission  of  diseases  is 
anemochory. Wind transmission is influenced by the upstream air currents, wind 
speed, and the downward wind movements. Wind is an efficient carrier of viral, 
bacterial, and fungal propagules. 

Fungi: It is common for fungi to produce diseases that are lightweight and easily 
spread by wind. A high number of spores and conidia are produced by fungal diseases, 
which have developed to release their spores with sufficient force and to produce 
spores that are incredibly thin and light to travel long distances. As an illustration, 
consider rusts, smuts, downy and powdery mildew. Both short- and long-distance 
distribution can be done with the help of the wind. Basidiospores from rust fungi, 
conidia from powdery mildew, and sporangia from downy mildew fungi are some of 
the spores employed for short-distance dissemination. The wind, which transports 
uredospores from the source of survival in the hills in the far north (Himalayas) and 
south (Nilgiris), is the only factor responsible for the annual recurrence of cereal 
rusts in the plains of northern India. 

Conidia of Alternaria, Helminthosporium and Pyricularia, uredospores of rust 
fungi and chlamydospores of smut fungi are a few examples of long-distance dispersal-
adapted spores (Anwar, 1949). Uredial rust fungi may travel considerable distances 
thanks to air currents, which makes it possible for destructive epidemics to spread 
across a wide area. For example, uredospores of Puccinia graminis var. tritici have 
been discovered up to 14000 feet above infected wheat fields. According to Atkinson 
(1953), reports of Alternaria spores at 8000 feet, Puccinia recondita spores at 12500 
feet, and Cronartium ribicola spores at 14000 feet all contained similar information. 
In just two days, this fungus’ uredospores can travel nearly a thousand miles across 
the United States, from Mexico in the south to Dakota and Minnesota in the north. 
Uredospores can travel up to 1100 miles in a wind of 30 miles per hour without 
losing viability if they are distributed at a height of 5000 feet.        

It assists in the spread of nematode cysts and the seeds of phanerogamic parasites, 
together with fungus. The worm Heterodera major cysts that cause the molya disease 

245

of wheat and barley are transported by dust storms from Rajasthan to Haryana. With 
the diseased material, certain pathogenic bacteria are carried over short distances 
by the wind. Erwinia amylovora, the bacterium that causes fire blight on apples and 
pears, exudes thin strands of exudate that can break off and be blown by the wind 
(Anderson, 1924). Although viruses and phytoplasmas are not directly transmitted 
by wind, the insect and mite vectors that carry them move in different directions 
and across greater distances depending on the direction and speed of the air. 

(ii) Water: The term “hydrochory” refers to the spread of plant diseases by means of 
water. Viruses can germinate more quickly on a moist surface, therefore even while 
water is less crucial than air in the long-distance transfer of diseases, it is more 
efficient. The main routes through which water is distributed are surface running 
water and rain splash. Short-distance water surface flow during irrigation from canals 
and wells or following heavy rains is what moves the germs. The mycelial fragments, 
spores, or sclerotia of fungi like Colletotrichum falcatum (red rot of sugarcane), 
Fusarium, Ganoderma, Macrophomina, Pythium, Phytophthora, Sclerotium, etc. can be 
disseminated by rainwater or irrigation water. Long-distance spreading by water is 
only feasible when floods cover a larger area or when water flows farther from the 
sources of pathogen survival (ARK, 1932).

        Rain splash dissemination is another term for splash dispersion. It is one 
of the most efficient means for the spread of bacterial plant diseases. The propagules 
may splash in small droplets and rest on neighbouring healthy surfaces that are 
susceptible to raindrops that strike sores, pustules, cankers, or even soil surfaces with 
force. Alternatively, the water droplets may be transported over considerable distances 
by the wind. Examples include bacterial leaf spot (Xanthomonas campestris pv. oryzae), 
bacterial leaf streak (Xanthomonas campestris pv. oryzicola), and green ear of bajra 
(Sclerospora graminicola). Bacterial and fungal spores that are already present in the air 
or on plant surfaces are conveyed downhill and deposited on healthy, sensitive plants 
when rain splashes or irrigation droplets fall from above. Water plays a critical role 
in the spread of plant diseases as well as the growth and spore release of numerous 
fungus. Additionally, it speeds up the processes of infection and spore germination.

Conclusion

Plant pathogens have a variety of strategies for surviving and spreading. They can 
benefit from a variety of biotic and abiotic variables in order to survive and grow to 
their full potential. Infection is a survival tactic for plant pathogens. The foundation 
for plant pathogens growth is primary infection. The source of pathogen survival in 
the crops is primary inoculum. Hosts that are infected serve as inoculum reservoirs. 
The spores or other pathogen structures act as sources of secondary inoculum and 

246

secondary infection, which disseminate the disease across the field after the disease 
has started to build up in the crop. So, we conclude that plant pathogens are even 
smarter than our assumptions as they use different techniques in different conditions 
for their survival and dissemination. Pathogen populations can be reduced by the 
application of cultural control strategies, such as the proper management of crop 
residue, utilizing suitable harvesting and storage techniques. By reducing pathogen 
proliferation, dissemination and survival, this will aid in managing plant diseases.

References

Abrahim, A. (2019). Loose Smut of Wheat (Ustilago tritici) and Its Managements: 

A Review Article. Journal of Biology, Agriculture and Healthcare, 9(8), 25-33.

Akbar, F., Khan, H., Khadim, N., Rahman, A. U., Ullah, R., Ahmad, N., Hadi, F., 
& Ke, C. (2023). Current status of peach leaf curl disease in Pakistan and 
future management strategies. Agrobiological Records, 12, 22-33. https://doi.
org/10.47278/journal.abr/2023.012

Anderson, P. J. (1924). Overwintering of tobacco wildfire bacteria in New England. 

Phytopathology,14, 132-139.

Anwar, A. A. (1949). Factors affecting the survival of Helminthosporium sativum and 

Fusarium lini in soil. Phytopathology, 39, 1005-1019. 

ARK, P. A. (1932). The behavior of B. amylovorus in soil. Phytopathology, 22, 7.  

Armstrong, G. M., & Armstrong, J. K. (1948). Non-susceptible hosts as carriers of 

wilt fusaria. Phytopathology, 38, 808-826. 

Astier,  P.,  Autieroh,  D.,  Baldisseri,  A.,  Baldo-Ceolinm,  M.,  Bannern,  M.,  & 
Bassompierrea, G. (2001). Inclusive production of rho0 (770), f(0)(980) and 
f(2)(1270) mesons in muon-neutrino charged current interactions. Nuclear 
Physics, B601, 3-23.

Atkinson, R. G. (1953). Survival and pathogenicity of Alternaria raphani after five 

years in dried soil cultures. Canadian Journal of Botany, 31, 542-547. 

Bhandari, D. R., Khanal, M. P., Joshi, B. K., Acharya, P., & Ghimire, K. H. (2017). 
Rice Science and Technology in Nepal. Government of Nepal. Crop Development 
Directorate (CDD) and Agronomy Society of Nepal, Kathmandu.

Baker, K. (1959). Soil microbiology and root disease fungi. Epilogue. In C. S. Holton, 

Ed., Plant pathology-problems and progress, 1905-1958. 

Baker, K.F., & Smith, S.H. (1966). Dynamics of seed transmission of plant pathogens. 

Annual Review of Phytopathology, 4, 311-334 

247

Barton, R. (1957). Germination of oospores of Pythium mamillatum in response to 

exudates from living seedlings. Nature, 180, 613-614. 

Beaumont, A. (1954). Soil-borne diseases and crop rotation. NAAS Quart. Rev, 1953, 

108-111. 

Berry, S. Z., & G. N. Davis. (1957). Formation of oospores by Peronospora destructor 
and their possible relation to epiphytology. Plant Disease Reporter, 41, 3-6. 

Brown, D. J. F., Robertson, W. M., & Trudgill, D. L. (1995). Transmission of viruses 

by plant nematodes. Annual review of phytopathology, 33(1), 223-249.

Campbell, R. N. (1996) Fungal transmission of plant viruses. Annual Review 
of Phytopathology, 34, 87-108. doi: 10.1146/annurev.phyto.34.1.87. PMID: 
15012536.

Castillo, J.N., Olive, E.F.,  & Campos, S.S. (2011). Emerging virus diseases transmitted 

by Whiteflies. Annual review of Phytopathology, 49, 2019_2248

Gupta, P., & Swarup, G. (1972). Ear cockle and yellow rot disease of wheat: nematode 

bacterial association. Nematologica , 18, 320-324

Joel, D.M., Hershenhorn, J., Eizenberg, H., Aly, R., Ejeta, G., Rich, P.J., Ransom, 
J.K., Sauerborn, J., & Rubiales, D. (2007). Biology and management of weedy 
root parasites. Horticultural reviews, 33, 267-349.

Jones, J.T., Haegeman, A., Danchin, E.G., Gaur, H.S., Helder, J., Jones, M.G., 
Kikuchi, T., Manzanilla-López, R., Palomares-Rius, J.E., Wesemael, W.M., 
& Perry, R.N. (2013). Top 10 plant-parasitic nematodes in molecular plant 
pathology. Molecular Plant Pathology, 14(9), 946-961

Kirk, W., Wharton, P., Hammerschmidt, R., Abu-el Samen, F., & Douches, D. 
(2013). Late Blight. MichiganState University Extension Bulletin E-2945. 
East Lansing, MI. Available on: http://www.potatodiseases.org/lateblight.html. 

Kumar, S., Bhowmick, M. K., & Ray, P. (2021). Weeds as alternate and alternative 

hosts of crop pests. Indian Journal of Weed Science, 53(1), 14-29.

Lapidot, M., Legg, J.P., Wintermantel, W.M., Polston, J.E., 2014. Management of 
whitefly transmitted viruses in open-field production systems. In advances in 
virus research, 90, 148-206.

Martín, I., Gálvez, L., Guasch, L., & Palmero, D. (2022). Fungal Pathogens and 
Seed Storage in the Dry State. Plants, 11, 3167. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
plants11223167

Miedaner, T., & Geiger, H. H. (2015). Biology, genetics, and management of ergot 

248

(Claviceps spp.) in rye, sorghum, and pearl millet. Toxins, 7(3), 659-678.

Mizukami, T. (1961). Studies on the ecological properties of Xanthomonas oryzae 
(Uyeda et Ishiyama) Dowson, the causal organism of bacterial leaf blight of 
rice plant. Bulletin of the Faculty of Agriculture, Saga University, 13, 1-85

Mizukami, T., & Wakimoto, S. (1969). Epidemiology and control of bacterial leaf 
blight of rice. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 7, 51-72. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.py.07.090169.000411 

Nabi, S., Madhupriya, Dubey, D., Rao, G. P., Baranwal, V. K., & Sharma, P. (2015). 
Characterization of phytoplasmas associated with sesame (Sesamum indicum) 
phyllody disease in North India utilizing multilocus genes and RFLP analysis. 
Indian Phytopathology, 68(1), 112-119.

Ng, J.C., & Perry, K.L. (2014). Transmission of plant viruses by aphid vectors. 

Molecular Plant Pathology, 5 (5), 505-511.

Prasad, S. M., & Sahambi, H. S. (1982). Sesamum phyllody - some new host records. 

Indian Phytopathology, 35(1), 159-160.

Scharf, C. S., &  DePalma, N. K. (1981). Birds and mammals as vectors of the 
chestnut blight fungus (Endothia parasitica). Canadian Journal of Zoology, 59(9), 
1647-1650.

Senapati, M., Tiwari, A., Sharma, N., Chandra, P., Bashyal, B. M., Ellur, R. K.,  & 
Krishnan, S. G. (2022). Rhizoctonia solani Kühn pathophysiology: Status and prospects 
of sheath blight disease management in rice. Frontiers in Plant Science, 13, 881116.

Sharma, R., & Tamta, S. (2015). A Review on Red Rot: The “Cancer” of Sugarcane. 

Journal of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, 1, 003.

Shinners, C. T., Bains, P., McLaren, D., & Thomson, J. (2003). Commercial potato 
production-disease management. Guide to commercial potato production prairies. 
Western Potato Council. Available on: http://www. gov. mb. ca/agriculture//crops/
potatoes/bda04s07.

Singh, S.R., Phurailatpam, A.K., Lyngdoh, N. & Pandey, A.K. (2016). Loranthus 
legistrinus– A causal factor for khasi Mandarin (Citrus reticulate Blanco.) 
decline in Arunachal Pradesh. AJH. 11(2), 368-372.

Van Regenmortel, M.H.V., Fauquet, C.M., Bishop, D.H.L., Carstens, E.B., Estes, 
M.K., &  Lemon, S.M. (2000). Virus Taxonomy. Seventh Report of the 
International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. Academic Press, San Diego.

Welliver, R. A., & Halbrendt, J. M. (1992). Dodder transmission of tomato ringspot 

virus. Plant Disease, 76(6), 642-642.

249

Wielkopolan, B., Jakubowska, M., & Obrępalska-Stęplowska, A. (2021). Beetles as 

plant pathogen vectors. Frontiers in Plant Science, 2241.

Williams, S.T., Davies, F.L., Mayfield, C.I., & Khan, M.R. (1971). Studies on the 
ecology of actinomycetes in soil II. The pH requirements of Streptomycetes from 
two acid soils. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 3(3), 187-195.

Yarwood, C. (1955). Mechanical transmission of an apple mosaic virus. Hilgardia, 

23 (15), 613-628.

250

16

Host Plant Resistance

Gayathri V1 and  Nagajyothi G N2
1M.Sc, (Hort), Kittur Rani Channamma College of Horticulture ( KRCCH), 
Arabhavi, University of Horticultural Sciences(UHS), Bagalkote, Karnataka-591218
2Ph.D. Scholar., College of Horticulture,Bangalore, University of Horticultural 
Sciences (UHS), Bagalkote, Karnataka-587104

Abstract 

Organic plant production uses natural products and natural self -regulation processes 
occurring in ecosystem. One of the most effective and eco friendly approach in 
controlling the  plant diseases is to adoption of biotechnological techniques in 
production of disease resistant plants. As it is sustainable with no negative impact 
on plant health and agronomy. The availaibility of innovative applications and 
molecular techniques opens up new useful possibilities to plant protection for 
sustainable and organic agriculture. The author presents the host plant resistance, 
its types, mechanisms, modern approaches for breeding disease resistance crops in 
plant pathology as a new plant protection strategy.

Keywords: Biotechnological approaches, Genetic engineering, Host plant resistance, 
Transgenic disease management. 

Introduction 

In India, population is growing faster day by day. As a result, huge demand in the 
nutritious, organic food supply for the mankind’s balanced diet.  

The plant diseases are the most threat factor which are causing significant yield 
losses in most of the agricultural and horticultural crops. Traditional plant breeding 
methods have been used to develop resistant cultivars to various diseases. It has 
become routine to transfer genes from one organism to another, genes conferring 

251

disease resistance to crop plants have been introduced.  However, this process is time 
consuming and limited availability of genetic resources for most of the crops. The 
most important reasons for limited genetic resources available for breeding are that 
many of the natural gene traits that may be beneficial in one plant tissue may be 
deleterious in other plant tissue and that are causing loss of genes pools recurring 
during the domestication and breeding of crop plant (Cook and Baker, 1983). 
According to Agrios (1988; 2005) biotechnology is the genetic manipulation and 
multiplication of any living organism through novel techniques and technologies 
such as tissue culture, genetic engineering and transgenic disease management 
resulting in the production of improved or new organism and products that can be 
used in variety of ways for the benefit of mankind. Modern technologies such as gene 
transfers could be accomplished by  the gene or biolistic method and agrobacterium 
mediated method as direct method. Vector mediated method as indirect method 
(Agnihotri et al., 1989). This can facilitate new insights into the complex metabolite 
neighbourhoods that give rise to a given phenotype and may allow discovery of 
new target genes to modify a given pathway. Such genes can then be subject to new 
metabolic engineering efforts and applications. Biotechnology permits accurate 
diagnosis of plant diseases in present decades. ELISA and PCR techniques are used 
in the identification of viral and bacterial diseases. The aim to write up this  review 
to bring up the modern biotechnological approaches in controlling of plant diseases.

Terminologies: 

Disease resistance 

The inherent ability of an organism to resist or withstand the pathogen/ its infection 
is called Disease resistance. 

Host Plant Resistance (HPR)

‘Those characters that enable a plant to avoid, tolerate or recover from attacks 
of insects under conditions that would cause greater injury to other plants of the 
same species’.  - Painter R.H. (1951)

‘Those heritable characteristics  possessed by the plant which influence the 

ultimate degree of damage done by the insect’.  - Maxwell E.G. (1972) 

A physiological deviation from the normal functioning of the organism/ plant 
caused by pathogenic organisms is a disease and may be caused by fungi, bacteria 
or viruses. 

252

Host – Pathogen relationship 

A disease is the result of an interaction of genes governing resistance in the host 
with those of governing pathogenicity in the pathogen. The resistance of a crop to a 
physiological race of the pathogen depends not only on the genotype of the host for 
resistance but also on the genotype of the pathogen for virulence or aggressiveness. 

H.H. Flor (1942) proposed the gene-for-gene hypothesis, according to which, ‘for 
every gene for resistance in the host, there is a corresponding gene for pathogenicity 
in the pathogen’. It means that there are at least two alleles at a locus controlling 
resistance/susceptibility in the host (R-r) and two alleles at a corresponding locus 
in the pathogen (V-v) controlling virulence / aggressiveness leading to  no disease 
/ disease(Fig.1) (Agrimoon.com)

Fig.1 Gene-for-gene hypothesis (Agrios, 2005)

Types of  Disease Resistance

1.  Ecological resistance or Pseudo resistance 

  Apparent  resistance  resulting  from  transitory  characters  in  potentially 
susceptible host plants due to environmental conditions
 Pseudo resistance is classified into 3 categories 
a.  Host evasion

Host may pass through the most susceptible stage quickly or at a time 
when disease are less or evade injury by early maturing. This pertains 
whole population of the host 

253

b.  Induced resistance 

Increase in resistance temporarily  as a result of some changed conditions 
of plants or environment such as change in the amount of water or 
nutrient status of soil.

c.  Disease escape 

Absence of infection or injury to the host plant due to transitory process 
like incomplete infection. This pertains  to few individuals of the host. 
(Agrimoon.com)
2.  Genetic Resistance 
A.  Based on the number of genes 
1.  Monogenic resistance - controlled by single gene 
2.  Oligogenic resistance - controlled by few  genes 
3.  Polygenic resistance - controlled by many genes 
4.  Minor gene resistance - controlled by many minor genes. Also called as 
adult resistance/mature resistance /field resistance /horizontal resistance  
5.  Major gene resistance - controlled by one or few major gene also called 

as vertical resistance 
B.  Based on biotype reaction 
1.  Vertical  resistance  –  effective  against  specific  biotypes  (Specific  resis-

tance)

specific resistance)

2.  Horizontal resistance – effective against all the known bio types (Non- 

C.  Based on population /line concept 
1.  Pureline resistance – exhibited by lines which are phenotypically and ge-

netically similar.

2.  Multiline  resistance  –  exhibited  by  lines  which  are  phenotypically  and 

genetically dissimilar.
D.  Multitrophic interactions 
1.  Cross resistance – variety with resistance incorporated against a primary 

host to another host 

2.  Multiline  resistance  –  resistance  incorporated  in  a  variety  against  dif-
ferent  environmental  stresses  like  insects,  diseases,  nematodes,  heat, 
drought, cold etc 

E.  Based on evolutionary concept 
1.  Sympatric resistance – acquired by co-evolution of plant and insect (gene 

for gene) and governed by major genes.

2.  Allopatric resistance – not acquired by co-evolution of plant and insect 

and governed by many genes.

254

Mechanism of disease resistance or Nature of disease resistance 

Disease resistance is governed by several inbuilt mechanisms of the host plants 
against infection by the pathogen. They are disease escape, disease endurance or 
tolerance and true resistance. (Agrimoon.com)

a. Disease escape or  Pseudo-resistance

It is a prevention mechanism that causes the host to escape pathogenic infection. 
Early or late maturity of the crop may prevent physical contact of the pathogen 
with the host. Mechanical and anatomical barriers such as thick cuticle, waxy bloom 
on leaves and stem, stomatal regulation prevent penetration of spores. Ex: Ergot 
(Claviceps purpurea), a fungal disease of inflorescence in cereals does not affect 
varieties of wheat and barley in which the flowers remain closed until pollination 
occurs. Erect leaves of barley avoid deposition of spores of Erysiphe graminis tritici 
in contrast to prostrate leaves. Early maturing varieties of groundnut escape early 
leaf spot infection (Cercospora arachidicola) and early varieties of wheat escape rust 
and loose smut infection.

A change in planting season has also been successfully employed as a measure 
of securing escape, e.g., the leaf rust of sugarcane (Puccinia sacchari) in the canal areas 
of Bombay severely affects cane when planted in June, but is of minor importance 
or absent in crops sown in October. 

b. Disease endurance 

The host after being infected by the pathogen tolerates the infection and suffers less 
damage. It does not result in any substantial decrease in yield. This is brought about 
by influence of external factors. 

The plants fertilized with phosphatic and potash manures are more tolerant to 
disease in wheat against rust infection. Rice crops fertilized by silicates are resistant 
to blast (Pyriculiaria oryzae) in Japan. The fertilizers act indirectly to arrest vegetative 
growth and promote early maturity, better straw and strengthening tissues to protect 
the plant which form a bulwark against pathogenic invasion. 

c. True resistance

It is the ability of the host plant to resist or withstand the attack of a pathogen.  
True resistance is inheritable and much less subject to environmental influence. It 
is specific in character. The basis of resistance may be morphological, functional, 
structural or protoplasmic. Functional nature of resistance is determined by opening 
of the stomata, time of opening of flowers and time of maturity, rate of cork formation 
and cambial activity.

255

True resistance is classified into 2 types:

Vander Plank (1960) has discussed the whole issue of disease resistance in a different 
perspective. 

1.  Vertical resistance (VR) 

If  more resistance to some races of a pathogen than to other races is called vertical 
resistance. It is also called perpendicular resistance, physiological resistance, seedling 
resistance, hypersensitivity, race specific resistance or qualitative resistance, unstable, 
often complete type of resistance. As it is conditioned by one or a few genes, it is 
called major gene or monogenic of oligogenic resistance. 

2.  Horizontal resistance (HR)

Resistance to more than one race of the pathogen or to many or all races of the 
pathogen is called horizontal resistance. It is non-specific resistance governed by 
polygenes. It is severally termed as non-specific, general, polygenic, minor gene, 
mature plant, adult, quantitative resistance, partial or field resistance or tolerance. 
HR causes reduction in the number and rate of sporulation of the pathogen on the 
host and slows down the infection rate. 

Defense mechanisms of  plants with  its dominant plant genes  against pathogens  

1.  Detoxification of pathotoxins

Pathogens that produce pathogenesis-related phytotoxins usually also have the 
capacity to metabolize i.e. detoxify, these compounds. The search for genes encoding 
the enzyme(s) performing the key catabolic step(s) should thus lead to a convenient 
source of resistance, which can be engineered into plants to protect them from 
the effects of the toxin. A gene encoding a tabtoxin acetyltransferase from the 
pathogen, Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci (wild fire disease of tobacco) was isolated 
and transferred into tobacco under a strong constitutive promotor. The transgenic 
plants expressed this gene and when treated with either the pathogen or its toxin, 
did not produce the chlorotic lesions typical of wild fire disease. (Agrimoon.com)

2.  Activation of plant defense mechanism-Phytoalexins 

Phytoalexins have long been known to accumulate in certain plants upon infection by 
pathogens. The production of phytoalexins is also triggered by mechanical stimulation, 
ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, stress and a variety of chemical elicitors. Phytoalexins 
are part of the localized hypersensitive response at the site of damage or pathogen 
ingress, which involves cell trauma and death. The importance of phytoalexins in 
the defense response is underscored by experiments and pathogenicity in Nectria 
haematococca was correlated to its ability to detoxify the phytoalexin, pisatin, by way 

256

of demethylation. By transferring the demethylase gene from Nectria, Aspergillus 
nidulans, a non-pathogen on peas, was rendered insensitive to pisatin. 

3.  Defense related genes in plants

a. Single gene defense mechanism 

There are some defense proteins which do not require any intermediate step both for 
their synthesis and their expression require only few steps and those genes encoding 
such proteins are called single gene defense mechanism. Chitinases and glucanases 
are those proteins belonging to single gene defense mechanism. 

1.  Chitinases and glucanases

Chitinases are abundant proteins found in wide variety of plants. There is strong 
correlative evidence that they are defense proteins with antifungal activity. Chitin 
is a major structural component of cell walls of many fungi. The low constitutive 
activity of chitinase found in many plants can be induced by wounding or by infection 
of the tissue with fungal pathogens. Chitinase with ß-1,3-glucanase (capable of 
degrading glucans present in fungal cell wall) degrades fungal cell walls and inhibits 
fungal growth at hyphal tips hyphal walls in plants. The chitinase and glucanase 
enzymes are having direct action against several fungal pathogens compared to 
other defense related proteins. Bean vacuolar chitinase gene under the control of 
the strong constitutive gene under the control of the strong constitutive promoter 
of the cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35 S transcript in tobacco and Brassica 
napus, which resulted in decreased symptom development by Rhizoctonia solani, the 
causative agent of post-emergence damping off. 

An endochitinase gene (from genomic tomato DNA library) was introduced 
into Brassica napus. var. oleifera. The transgenic Brassica showed enhanced resistance 
against several fungal pathogens like Cylindrosporium concentricum,  Phoma lingam 
and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum under field conditions when compared to non-transgenic 
plants. More recently, chitinase gene from Manduca sexta, tobacco horn worm, has 
been cloned into P. fluorescens to increase their antagonistic potential against R. 
solani. (Agrimoon.com)

b. Multigenic defense mechanism 

Defense responses such as phytoalexin biosynthesis or lignin deposition in the cell 
wall require the action of many genes. 

1.  Peroxidases 

Anionic peroxidases in the cell wall catalyze the production of phenolic radicals for 
the oxidative polymerization of lignin from cinnamyl alcohols. In tomato, there is 

257

a marked induction of two linked genes encoding highly anionic peroxidases in an 
incompatible interaction with an avirulent form of Verticillium albo-atrum, with only 
weak induction in the compatible interaction with a virulent form of this vascular 
pathogen. Expression of one of these genes in transgenic tobacco under the control 
of either its own promoter or the CaMV 35s promoter resulted in massive increase 
in anionic peroxidase activity and these plants apparently showed a significant 
increase in resistance to Peronospora parasitica as judged by symptom development 
and fungal sporulation. 

4. Activation of defense genes by chemicals

 Several classes of compounds have the potential to act as inducers of natural 
resistance mechanisms in horticultural crops and chemicals with such indirect modes 
of action may offer attractive alternatives or supplement to existing contact/systemic 
fungicides in integrated disease management. Increase was found to occur in response 
to salicylic acid treatment as well as oligosaccharides and glycoproteins originating 
from either fungal cell wall or host cell walls called as elicitors. Recently, chitosan 
seed treatment has been found to induce defense related genes like chitinase and 
glucanase in tomato and consequently the fusarium crown and root rot diseases were 
significantly reduced. Pre-treatment with 2, 6-dichloroisonicotinic acid was highly 
effective in significantly reducing both anthracnose (Colletotrichum lindemuthianum) 
and rust (Uromyces appendiculatus) diseases in bean plants. (Agrimoon.com)

Modern approaches of breeding for disease resistance crops in plant pathology 

1. Introduction                    

2. Selection                           

3. Hybridization followed by selection 

4. Back cross method          

5. Induced mutagenesis            

6. Development of multilines                     

7. Cell and tissue culture          

8. Biotechnological approaches  

1. Introduction

It is a very simple and inexpensive method. Introductions have served as a useful 
method of disease control. It is possible that a variety resistant in one region need 
not be resistant in another region due to variation in the physiological race of the 

258

pathogen or due to a much different agroclimatic condition in the new location. 
Their yield performance and disease resistance should be confirmed by large scale 
cultivation. 

For example, Ridley wheat introduced from Australia - rust resistant variety. 
Manila, a rice variety introduced in Karnataka from the Philippines, has tolerance 
to blast, bacterial leaf blight and sheath blight. Intan, a Javanica type rice variety 
introduced in Karnataka from Indonesia is highly resistant to blast. Munal, a rice 
variety introduced in West Bengal from the U.S.A. is tolerant to blast, bacterial leaf 
blight and leaf folder (pest). Some of IRRI rice varieties such as IR 20, IR.24, IR.28, 
IR.34, IR.36 and IR .50 possess resistance to one or more diseases. 

2. Selection

 This is better method than introduction and has more chances of success in obtaining 
disease-resistant plants. The work of selection is carried out either in the naturally 
infected field conditions or under artificially inoculated conditions. The resistance in 
such individuals will occur in nature by mutation. To ensure the resistant character 
of a plant, large population of crop plant may be exposed to the attack of pathogen 
under artificial conditions and the non-infected plants may be chosen. Suvarnamodan 
rice of Kerala is a pure line of ARC is highly tolerant to blast. Sugandh of Bihar 
is a selection from Basmati rice of Orissa tolerant to bacterial leaf blight. Rice 
varieties Sudha (Bihar), Sabita, Nalini (West Bengal), Patel 85 (Madhya Pradesh), 
Janaki(Bihar), Improved White Ponni (Tamil Nadu), Ambika (Maharashtra), are 
some of rice selections resistant to one or more diseases. 

 3. Hybridization 

When selection of resistant varieties is not feasible, resistant varieties may be evolved 
by crossing the susceptible popular variety with resistant wild variety where in the 
resistant gene or genes transferred into the genetic make up of susceptible variety. 
Very often the F1 from crosses may be resistant but carry the other undesirable 
qualities of the resistant parent. The bad qualities are removed by several back 
crossing of F1 with the susceptible parent may ultimately yield a resistant progeny 
with good agronomic characteristics. Under certain circumstances pedigree or bulk 
method of selection is followed to obtain a resistant variety. Selection are made in 
F2 generation for superior genetic traits including disease resistance. By continued 
selfing, selections are made through F3 to F5 or F6 generations and the best variety 
is selected. This method is suited for small grains and beans but unsuited to fruits 
and vegetables. 

259

4. Back cross method 

Back cross method is widely used to transfer  the disease resistance from wild species. 
Wild species are rice sources of disease resistance. Interspecific hybridization is made 
to transfer the gene or genes for resistance to the cultivated species. Resistance to 
grassy stunt virus from Oryza nivara to O.sativa, late blight resistance from Solanum 
demissum to cultivated potato, rust resistance from durum to aestivum wheat are some 
of the examples involving interspecific hybridization. Depending upon the number 
of genes governing resistance and the nature of the gene, whether dominant or 
recessive, the procedure varies. The number of back crosses to the cultivated species 
may be five to six. Once the back cross progeny resemble the cultivated parent, then 
they are selfed and segregating progeny screened for disease resistance.

 5. Induced mutagenesis 

While following mutation breeding for disease resistance, a large number of mutation 
progeny should be produced and screened under artificial epiphytotic condition to 
select resistant plants. MCU10 cotton, a resistant variety to bacterial blight was 
evolved in Tamil Nadu by subjecting seeds of a susceptible variety CO-4 to gamma 
rays followed by rigorous screening and selection

 6. Development of multilines 

The concept of multilines was first suggested by Jensen(1952) and developed by 
Borlaug (1959) for evolving multiline varieties to resist stem rust in wheat. A 
multiline variety is a composite of genetically similar lines, except that each line 
possesses a different gene for resistance to the pathogen. Lines that are genetically 
similar, except for one gene are called isoline. It is assumed that gene for resistance 
in each isoline contributes resistance to a separate physiological race or group of 
races. Genes for disease resistance are transferred by backcrossing from donor 
varieties to a common disease susceptible, but agronomically superior, recurrent 
parent. Isolines are generated differing only in the gene for disease resistance. The 
isolines are composited to synthesize a multiline variety. The isolines are maintained 
for resynthesizing the multiline whenever needed.

A multiline variety is composed of a mixture of resistant and susceptible 
genotypes and provides a buffering effect against rapid development of disease. It 
will provide resistance or tolerance to a broad spectrum of races of a pathogen. If 
new races of the pathogen are identified at a later stage, additional isolines resistant 
to the newly arisen races may be constituted and incorporated. Care should be 
taken to see that there is uniformity for height, maturity and other features in the 
multiline. Though multilines provide stability of yield due to reduction of damage by 

260

pathogens, the limitations of multiline varieties are that the yield level of multiline 
varieties is limited to that of the recurrent parent, 4 to 5 years are required to stabilize 
isogenic lines and the pathogen may produce new races at a faster rate than the 
development of a multiline. Multiline varieties have been developed for resistance 
to stem rust and stripe rust of wheat and crown rust of oats. The first multiline 
variety in wheat- Miramar 60 was developed and released in Columbia to combat 
the attack of yellow rust. Miramar 63 and Miramar 65 were resistant to stem rust 
and stripe rust. Yoqui 50, Crew and Tumult are a few other wheat multilines. Kalyan 
sona and Sonalika-based multilines of wheat resistant to different races of rust have 
been developed in India. 

7. Cell and tissue culture 

Tissue culture approach is one of the best techniques in the field of molecular biology 
and it is applied in several ways for the development of disease resistance cultivars 
in agriculture and horticulture.

a. Somaclonal Variation

Selection in vitro aims to specific traits by subjecting large populations of cultured cells 
to the action of a selective agent in the petridish. For purpose of disease resistance, this 
selection can be done by fungal pathogens, culture filtrates of pathogens or isolated 
phytotoxins that are known to have a role in pathogenesis. The selection will allow 
only those cells to survive and proliferate that are resistant to the challenge. Plants 
regenerated from resistant cells often display a resistant phenotype when evaluated 
with either the toxin or the pathogen itself.

In order to be useful, new resistance traits, whether selected or not, must be 
heritable sexually or in the case of vegetatively propagated crops must be transmitted 
through vegetative propagules. The pathogens produced toxins can be used to screen 
calluses (cultured cells) which may regenerate resistant plants. The toxins will kill 
the calluses, but the mutant toxin resistant calluses will survive. The toxin-resistant 
calluses yield disease resistance plants. Similarly, H. maydis resistant maize plants, 
H. sacchari resistant sugarcane plants and Phytophthora infestans resistant tobacco 
plants have been evolved. 

b. Anther culture

The plants are produced directly from microspores (immature pollen grains). Through 
anther or microspore culture, one has immediate access to unique and rare combinations 
of genes representing the recombination of the genetic material contributed by the 
parents of the cross. Through anther culture, followed by chromosome doubling, such 

261

gene combinations can be fixed in their homozygous state as instant inbreds in a 
single step. Over the past two decades, anther culture has become widely accepted as 
a tool in cultivar development. This technique can be particularly useful for producing 
plants with novel combinations of resistance genes for managing fungal diseases.

c. Protoplasmic fusion

This generates hybrid cells by merging the total cellular components of somatic 
cells from which the cell walls have been removed to produce protoplasts. The 
incompatibility preventing sexual fertilization between species is thus avoided and 
viable hybrids have been created, even between unrelated distance species. Disease 
resistance genes have been transferred by protoplasts fusion from wild species into 
potato.

Disease resistant plants from tissue culture (Agrimoon.com)

S.no Plant 
Potato 
1.

Culture system 
Protoplasts 

Callus 
Callus 

Protoplasts
Meristem

Tomato

Banana 

2.

3.

4.

Strawberry  Callus 

8. Biotechnological Approaches 

1. Genetic Engineering 

selection
SCV

Resistance to pathogen
Phytopthora infestans 
Alternaria solani
CF
Fusarium oxysporum
Fusaric acid  Fusarium oxysporum

SCV

SCV

Fusarium oxysporum

Fusarium oxysporum

Genetic Engineering is the technology by which a particular gene is isolated from 
one organism and inserted into the genome of another organism and made to 
express at the right time. 

Vectors for transfer of genes 

     Genetic engineering has been used to manage plant virus diseases. For transfer of 
genes to plants vectors are needed in which the gene to be transferred will multiply 
several folds. The most effective gene vector developed is the Tumour inducing 
plasmid of Agrobacterium tumefaciens from which the Tumor inducing genes have 
been removed A.tumefaciens induces tumors (crown galls) through ti-plasmid 
(tumor-inducing) which is a circular double stranded DNA molecule containing up 

262

to 2,00,000 base pairs organized into several genes. The Ti-plasmid is transferred 
from the bacterium into the cell. A specific region of the plasmid, the T-DNA, is 
transferred from the plasmid to the nucleus of the plant cell. It becomes integrated 
into the plant nuclear genome and  transcribed. Cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 
is the only plant virus with double-stranded DNA genome. As it has DNA genome, 
it is used as a possible vector in introducing foreign genes into plant. It is possible to 
insert a non-viral gene into CaMV genome and obtain expression of the gene in the 
infected plant. The viral promotor regions from CaMV are effective for obtaining 
expression of other genes in plant cells. The genes to be expressed is now fused to a 
promotor element from CaMV and a gene of A.tumifaciens. They are then introduced 
into the plants using A. tumefaciens Ti-DNA transformation.

DNA construction

Messenger RNA is extracted and exposed to an enzyme reverse transcriptase which 
synthesizes a complimentary single stranded DNA. The complimentary DNA 
(cDNA) is exposed to another enzyme, DNA polymerase, which produces the 
double stranded cDNA. The cDNAs are inserted into the plasmids of A. tumefaciens. 

2. Transgenic Plant Disease Management 

1.  Mitochondrial RNA (MIC RNA) expression in transgenic plants

A DNA copy is made of one or more sections of the viral genome that include the 
initiation codon for vital proteins to virus replication. The DNA copy is inserted in 
the host-cell genome, Cells then produce an `antisera RNA’ called mic RNA (mRNA 
interfering complementary to 5’ end of the gene). The mic RNA hybridizes in vivo 
with the viral mRNA blacking translation. The mic RNA is  inserted into the plants 
using the Ti plasmid of A. tumefaciens. Plants regenerated from the transformed 
cells will be resistant to the particular virus. This possibility is also being exploited 
for the control of virus diseases. 

2.  Use of DNA markers for cloning resistance genes 

Molecular markers viz., isozymes and DNA markers (Restriction Fragment Length 
Polymorphisms - RFLPs; Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA - RAPD and 
others) are being used in several areas relevant to identification of disease resistance 
genes. Some of the disease resistance genes using random DNA markers have been 
identified.

263

Disease resistance genes mapped using RFLP markers

Plant 
Tomato
citrus

Pathogen 
Fusarium oxysporum
Phytopthora spp

3. Satellite RNA expression in transgenic plants 

Satellite RNAs are associated with several viruses. They are packaged into virus 
particles along with the genomic RNAs of the helper virus. They are not part of the 
viral genome and have no obvious sequence relationships with the helper virus. The 
presence of the satellite RNA suppresses the disease severity in many hosts. Hence 
transgenic plants which express satellite RNA have been produced to manage virus 
diseases. e.g., Transgenic plants of tobacco expressed the synthesis of satellite tobacco 
ring spot virus and reduce the virus disease incidence. Satellite RNA expressing 
tobacco plants against Cucumber Mosaic Virus (CMV) and Tobacco aspermy virus 
have been synthesized. 

4. Candidate Genes

a.  Viral Pathogens 

Use of transgenic resistance against plant disease is that was accomplished in the 
management of papaya ring spot virus (PRSV) in Hawaii ( Jain, 1993). Coat- protein- 
mediated resistance using coat protein genes sourced form a Hawaiian strain of 
PRSV was attempted. One transgenic line was found to be completely resistant to 
PRSV (Mandahar and Khurana, 1998; Balasubramania, 2009). 

Recently, a gene silencing mechanism has been put to productive use in obtaining 
rice yellow mottle virus. An open reading frame of the virus itself is expressed in 
rice in order to stop the viral spread in an effective manner. Similar attempts also 
have been made in obtaining multiple viral infections (tomato spotted wilt virus 
and turnip mosaic virus) in plant (Chopra and Sharma, 1991). 

b.  Bacterial Pathogens

A wide-spectrum bacterium bacterial blight resistance gene Xa-21, sourced from 
an African rice, Oryza longistaminata was backcrossed into cultivated variety by 
scientists of the International Rice Research Institute, the Philippines (IRRI). The 
resistance gene was cloned using molecular means by Pam Ronald of University of 
California and distributed to labs all over the world, so that the gene could be put 
into rice cultivars of local importance (Oswald, 1951). 

264

Wild Fire disease of tobacco caused Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci is a serious 
disease. A phytotoxin secreted by the pathogen drastically modifies the amino acid 
metabolism of the plant with the eventual accumulation of ammonia in tobacco 
leaves, which causes extensive blighting (Maloy, 2005). Interestingly, the pathogen 
that synthesis the phytotoxin remains unaffected by the toxin. This formed the basis 
for a search of the candidate gene from the pathogen itself. 

A toxin-inactivating gene, which was named ‘ttr’ was successfully isolated from 
the pathogen and the same was cloned into tobacco cultivars which showed excellent 
wildfire resistance (Agrios, 1988).

c.  Fungal Pathogens

PR- protein genes appear to be a very potential source for candidate genes for 
fungal resistance. These proteins may play a direct role in defense by attacking and 
degrading pathogen cell wall components. Typical candidate genes are that encoding 
chitinases and ß – 1, 3 glucanases (Fuchs and Gonsalves, 1996) increasing expression 
of individual and multiple PR-proteins in various crops have demonstrated some 
success in enhancing disease resistance in particular pathogens (e.g. Rice against 
Rhizoctonia solani, the shealth blight pathogen). A result of a research shows a 
chitianase gene from an anti-fungal bio-control fungus species (Trichoderma viridae) 
confers transgenic resistance against the rice sheath blight pathogen. A rice PR-5 
protein gene in wheat delays onset of symptoms caused by wheat scab pathogen 
(Maloy, 2005).

Conclusion 

We have  to control the plant diseases that have plagued mankind since the dawn of 
agriculture. The biotechnological methods to combat disease reviewed here are more 
effective, environmentally friendly and safer than many current common methods 
of control. We need to double our food production by  50 years, and 70% of this 
increase needs to be achieved by adopting new technology. Therefore, we cannot 
ignore these approaches. However, almost  the people in the growing decades needs 
ultimate disease free food  and atleast maintaining the healthy and good soil fertility.

265

References
Agrios, G. N. (1988). Plant pathology 3rd Ed. (1997) 4th(Ed.) New York (pp123-178). 

Agrios, G. N. (2005). Plant Pathology. 5th(Eds.), New York (pp. 213-223). Elsevier 

Elsevier Academic Press.

Academic Press 

Agnihotri, V. P. N., Singh, H. S., Chaube, U. S., Singh and Dwivedi, T. S. (1989). 
Perspectives in plant pathology. Today and Tomorrow printers and publishers, 
New Delhi, India.

Balasubramania (2009). Biotechnology centre for plants molecular Biology. Jamel 

Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore, India.- 641003 

Chopra, V. L. and R. P. Sharma. (1991). Biotechnology in crop improvement. Current 

science, 60(9 and     10), 443-547 

Cook, R. J. and Baker, K. F. (1983). The native and practice of biological control of 
plant pathogens. Annals of phytopathology Society., St paul, Minn., USA.

Fuchs, M. and Gonsalves, D., (1996). Genetic engineering. In: environmentally 
safe Approaches to crop disease control, N.A. Rechcigl and J.E. Rechcigl (Eds) 
BocaRaton, Newyork, (pp. 333-368). CRC Press.

Jain, S. M. (1993). Recent advances in plant genetic engineering. Current Science, 

64(10), 715- 724

Maloy, O. C. (2005). Plant disease management. The plant instructor. 

Mandahar, C. L. and Khurana, S. M. P. (1998). The  role of plant biotechnology in 
controlling plant diseases in: Pathological problems of economic crop plants 
and their management, S. M. Paul Khurana (ed.), Jodhpur, India, Scientific 
Publishers. (pp. 637-647) 

Oswald. J. W. (1951). The relation of periconia to milo root in califonia, Phytopath; 

41, pp-28 – 29

www.Agrimoon.com

266

Molecular Techniques in Plant 

17

Pathology: Advances and 
Applications 

*R. L. Joshi1, J. J. Padsala1, C. M. Bhaliya2 and H. A. Shekhada3
1Ph. D. Scholar, Department of Plant Pathology, Navsari Agricultural University 
(Gujarat) 396 450.
2Assistant professor, Department of Plant Pathology, Junagadh Agricultural University
(Gujarat) 362 001.
3Ph. D. Scholar, Department of Plant Pathology, Junagadh Agricultural University 
(Gujarat) 362 001.

Abstract

Molecular techniques have revolutionized the field of plant pathology by providing 
powerful tools for the detection, diagnosis and management of plant pathogens. 
These techniques offer several advantages over traditional methods, including higher 
sensitivity, specificity and speed. Molecular methods such as DNA barcoding, DNA/
RNA probe methods, in situ hybridization, microarray, Loop-mediated isothermal 
amplification (LAMP) and CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing have greatly advanced 
our understanding of plant diseases and opened new avenues for disease control. 
They facilitate early detection of diseases, providing crucial information for timely 
intervention and preventing further spread. These molecular techniques enable the 
accurate identification of plant pathogens including bacteria, fungi, viruses and 
oomycetes, allowing for targeted management strategies. The application of molecular 
techniques in plant pathology has not only improved disease diagnostics but also 
enhanced breeding programs for developing resistant crop varieties. By identifying 
and targeting specific genes associated with disease resistance, researchers can utilize 
genetic engineering tools to enhance plant defence mechanisms and reduce crop losses.

Keywords: Molecular techniques, detection, diagnosis, plant pathogen

267

Introduction

The degradation of plant products, which results in a global loss estimated between 
10 and 30 percent, poses a significant constraint on food resources (Okawa, 2015). 
Pathogens and their associated toxins are major contributors to this deterioration, 
making food safety a critical concern. Bacterial, fungal, and viral infections are 
prominent culprits behind plant diseases, spreading extensively throughout plantations 
through the introduction of disease-causing agents or infected plants (Sankaran et al., 
2010). In both fundamental and applied plant research, early assessment of disease 
occurrence and severity in field crops is vital (Gautam and Kumar, 2020). Accurate 
and timely assessments are necessary as they form the basis for implementing effective 
plant protection measures in the field.

Plants are susceptible to infections caused by various pathogenic microorganisms 
throughout their lifecycle, starting from seedling emergence until maturity. Microbial 
pathogens pose a significant threat to crop production worldwide, leading to substantial 
losses. Infectious diseases caused by these pathogens continue to hinder efforts aimed 
at increasing agricultural output globally. As a result, monitoring plant health and 
promptly diagnosing plant diseases are essential for mitigating the extent of damage 
caused by pathogens. Early detection of diseases provides valuable information that 
facilitates the implementation of effective and precise management strategies to 
control and mitigate the impact of these diseases.

Globally, the agricultural sector suffers significant economic losses due to 
various plant pathogens. These escalating agricultural losses have captured the 
interest and concern of researchers and experts, leading to a strong emphasis on the 
advancement of miniaturized systems for pathogen detection and management in 
the field of phytopathology.

Traditional vs Molecular methods

Traditional methods and molecular methods are two different approaches used in 
plant pathology for the detection, identification, and management of plant diseases. 
Here are some key differences between these two methods:

1.  Principle of Detection:

 » Traditional methods: Traditional methods rely on visual observation of 
symptoms, morphological characteristics, and growth patterns of pathogens 
or their effects on plants.

 » Molecular methods: Molecular methods involve the detection and analysis 
of specific nucleic acids (DNA or RNA) of the pathogens using techniques 
such as PCR, DNA sequencing, or hybridization assays.

268

2.  Sensitivity and Specificity:

 » Traditional methods: Traditional methods may lack sensitivity, especially in early 
stages of infection or when pathogens are present in low concentrations. They 
also have limitations in distinguishing closely related pathogens or strains.
 » Molecular methods: Molecular methods offer high sensitivity, allowing 
detection of pathogens even at low concentrations. They provide high 
specificity by targeting specific genetic markers, enabling differentiation of 
closely related pathogens or strains.

3.  Speed and Efficiency:

 » Traditional methods: Traditional methods often require time-consuming 
processes, such as culturing pathogens, observing symptoms over time, or 
performing labour-intensive diagnostic tests.

 » Molecular methods: Molecular methods offer rapid and efficient detection, 
allowing for quicker diagnosis and decision-making. Techniques like PCR 
can produce results within hours.

4.  Accuracy and Reliability:

 » Traditional methods: Traditional methods heavily rely on the expertise and 
experience of pathologists, which can introduce subjectivity and variability 
in the diagnosis.

 » Molecular methods: Molecular methods provide objective and reproducible 
results, minimizing subjective interpretation. They offer high accuracy and 
reliability due to the specificity of nucleic acid-based detection.

5.  Pathogen Characterization:

 » Traditional methods: Traditional methods provide limited information about 

the genetic characteristics and diversity of pathogens.

 » Molecular methods: Molecular methods allow for detailed characterization 
of pathogens at the molecular level, including genetic diversity, strain 
identification, and evolutionary relationships.

6.  Disease Management:

 » Traditional methods: Traditional methods inform disease management 
based on visual symptoms and general knowledge of pathogen behaviour.
 » Molecular methods: Molecular methods enable targeted and precise disease 
management strategies by providing early detection, identification of specific 
pathogens/strains, and insights into pathogen populations and dynamics.

269

Molecular techniques for detection of plant pathogens:

The molecular detection and diagnosis of fungal plant pathogens require specific pre-
analytical steps, including the efficient lysis of fungal cells and the recovery of genomic 
DNA, as well as the subsequent purification and quantification of the extracted DNA. 
Various protocols for DNA isolation from fungi that infect plants have been developed. 
Recently, commercial DNA extraction kits have also been employed in fungal plant 
disease diagnostics (Martinelli et al., 2015; Moffat et al., 2015).

However, many laboratories still rely on standard protocols, which involve 
steps such as lyophilization of fungal mycelia, disruption of the chitin cell wall 
through grinding, and subsequent DNA isolation in a buffer containing chemicals. 
These protocols also include the removal of proteins using a phenol-chloroform 
mixture and DNA precipitation with propanol. The isolated fungal DNA can then 
be further purified using standard methods, including pelleting, silica membrane 
(Mancini et al., 2016), spin filter, or silica-coated magnetic particle separation. Finally, 
the concentration of fungal DNA in the samples can be determined using a UV 
spectrophotometer (Abdullah et al., 2018).

273

DNA barcoding:

DNA barcoding is a molecular diagnostic technique that utilizes a small segment 
of DNA to identify the species across various domains of eukaryotic life. This 
approach involves using standardized sequences of 500-800 base pairs as markers 
for species identification (Krishnamurthy and Francis, 2012). Several barcoding 
markers, such as ITS, SSU, LSU, EF-1α, and RPB, have been employed for fungal 
DNA barcoding. ITS (Internal Transcribed Spacer) commonly used as a universal 
barcode region in fungal DNA barcoding (Schoch et al., 2012; Li et al., 2011). The 
high level of polymorphism observed in the ITS region makes it a robust and reliable 
candidate for fungal DNA barcoding. However, in cases where primary barcodes are 
insufficient for identifying pathogenic fungal species, secondary barcodes developed 
to enhance accuracy. In the context of plant DNA barcoding, the ITS-2 spacer has 
proven to be a highly informative secondary barcode (Xu, 2016). This region offers 
valuable insights into species identification and classification, particularly in cases 
where primary barcodes are less effective.

ADVANTAGES

DNA barcoding offers numerous scientific advantages, including:

 »

 »

Facilitating species identification: DNA barcoding allows for the identification 
of species at any life stage, even when traditional morphological identification 
is challenging or impractical. This is particularly useful for identifying species 
based on their DNA sequences.

Species discovery through phylogenetic analysis: DNA barcoding enables 
the discovery of new species by analyzing their nucleic acid sequences 
and comparing them to known species. Phylogenetic analysis helps in 
understanding the evolutionary relationships and diversification of life.
 » Advancing DNA sequencing tools for biodiversity research: DNA barcoding 
has contributed to the development and improvement of DNA sequencing 
technologies and tools. These advancements have been instrumental in 
studying biodiversity on a large scale, enabling researchers to analyze and 
compare DNA sequences efficiently. 

DNA/RNA probe-based methods :

DNA/RNA probe methods offer highly sensitive and rapid diagnostic capabilities 
for plant diseases caused by microbial pathogens. These methods involve the use of 
probes to analyze nucleic acids without the need for amplification. Probes are short, 
single-stranded DNA sequences that are labelled with chemiluminescent reporter 

274

molecules or radio-labelled isotopes like 32P, 33P, or 35S. These labelled probes used 
to identify specific homologous sequences on the target DNA. Traditionally, DNA 
probes employed as an alternative to PCR for the identification of fungi in plant 
pathology. However, in recent methods, DNA probes often used in combination with 
PCR techniques (McCartney et al., 2003). This combination approach enhances the 
sensitivity and specificity of detection by using the highly specific nature of DNA 
probes to target specific nucleic acid sequences, while PCR amplifies the targeted 
DNA to increase the signal strength.

Northern blotting:

The Northern blot is a method used to transfer RNA onto a carrier for the identification 
of fungi. This process involves several steps:

1.  RNA Purification: Firstly, RNA purified from each tissue to examine the 

expression of the gene of interest.

2.  Gel Electrophoresis: The purified RNA is then loaded onto an agarose gel. 
An electric current applied to the gel, causing the RNA molecules to move 
towards the bottom. Smaller RNA molecules move faster than larger ones, 
leading to separation based on size.

3.  Transfer to Filter: After gel electrophoresis, the separated RNA fragments 
blotted onto a special filter paper, where each RNA molecule maintains its 
relative position to all other molecules.

4.  Hybridization with Probes: The filter is then exposed to radioactive probes 
that are complementary to specific RNA sequences. The probes hybridize 
with their complementary RNA sequences on the filter.

5.  Autoradiography: After hybridization, the filter is subjected to autoradiography 
to develop the film. If the probe has successfully hybridized to a fragment 
of RNA on the filter, a band will be detected on the autoradiograph.

The Northern blotting technique is useful for studying gene expression. However, it has 
relatively lower sensitivity compared to the modern RT-PCR (Reverse Transcription 
Polymerase Chain Reaction) technique. Both real-time PCR and Northern blotting 
used to identify Magnaporthe grisea in rice plants (Qi and Yang, 2002).

In situ Hybridization:

The in situ hybridization (ISH) technique utilizes single-stranded RNA probes that 
labelled with 35S. In ISH, various types of probes can be used, including synthetic 
oligonucleotides, cDNAs, and cRNAs. However, probing with riboprobes tends to 
yield the most sensitive and efficient results. Among the radioactive probes, 35S-labeled 

275

riboprobes are particularly sensitive and commonly used for the identification of 
mRNA (Hayden et al., 2002). ISH is a valuable tool for visualizing the infection of 
plant tissues by rust fungi. 

Fluorescent in-situ Hybridization (FISH):

FISH is a powerful technology in plant disease diagnostics, enabling the specific 
detection and visualization of DNA or RNA sequences in plant cells or tissues. It 
combines the specificity of DNA sequences with the sensitivity of fluorochrome-
based detection systems. 

Post Amplification Technique

Microarray:

Microarray technology has emerged as a highly efficient system for analysing large-
scale gene expression patterns simultaneously. The fundamental principle of DNA 
microarrays based on the ability of complementary sequences to bind to each other 
through hybridization. This specific binding allows target DNA or RNA molecules 
to hybridize with specific complementary DNA probes that immobilized on the 
microarray. The microarray consists of an array of DNA probes, each representing a 
specific gene or sequence of interest. These probes attached to a solid surface, such 
as a glass slide or silicon chip. When a labelled target DNA or RNA sample applied 
to the microarray, the complementary sequences present in the sample will hybridize 
with their corresponding DNA probes on the array.

This technique has successfully identified the presence of Aspergillus candida and 
Mycobacterium (Singh and Kumar 2013). Furthermore, four species of cucurbit-
infecting tobamoviruses were detected using viral microarray technology. In this case, 
a plant virus cDNA chip was designed, and a manual spotting system was employed 
to immobilize viral cDNA probes onto the chip. This enabled the simultaneous 
detection and identification of multiple tobamovirus species in cucurbit plants. The 
combination of hybridization and PCR amplification in this technique allows for 
the selective binding of target DNA or RNA to specific complementary probes, 
resulting in the identification and analysis of the desired microorganisms or viral 
species. This approach is highly effective in detecting and characterizing pathogens 
in various plant samples, contributing to the field of plant disease diagnostics and 
management.

Macroarray:

The Macroarray or DNA array hybridization, also known as Reverse dot plot, 
is a sensitive technique for identifying microbial species without the need for 

276

radioisotopes (Singh and Kumar, 2013). It utilizes the power of DNA amplification 
and hybridization simultaneously. This method involves the simultaneous PCR 
amplification of related species and the subsequent hybridization with specific 
DNA probes. By combining PCR with hybridization, the sensitivity of this assay 
significantly increased, up to 1000-fold or even higher compared to traditional 
PCR methods. This improved sensitivity enables the detection and identification 
of microbial species with greater precision and accuracy. The Macroarray technique 
successfully applied for the identification of various pathogenic microorganisms, 
including Alternaria alternata, Aspergillus fumigatus, Fusarium solani, Candida albicans 
and Cladosporium herbarum (Sato et al., 2010). Additionally, it has been used for the 
identification of fungal and oomycete pathogens that cause diseases in solanaceous 
crops (Zhang et al., 2008).

Isothermal amplification-based methods

Loop-mediated isothermal amplification

The Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) technique is a nucleic acid 
amplification method that allows for the rapid and specific amplification of target 
DNA sequences under isothermal conditions. The LAMP reaction involves several 
steps, which summarized as follows:

1.  Primer design: Design specific primers that recognize multiple regions 
within the target DNA sequence. These primers typically consist of two 
outer primers (forward and backward) and two inner primers (forward inner 
and backward inner) that initiate the amplification process.

2.  Reaction setup: Prepare a reaction mixture containing template DNA, LAMP 
primers, Bst DNA polymerase, nucleotides, buffer solution, and MgSO4.

3.  Incubation: Incubate the reaction mixture at a constant temperature (around 

60-65 degrees Celsius) for amplification.

4.  Amplification process: The LAMP reaction involves strand displacement, 
auto-cycling strand displacement, accumulation of DNA, and exponential 
amplification.

5.  Detection: Visualize the amplified DNA using colour change, turbidity, 

real-time monitoring, or gel electrophoresis.

The LAMP (Loop-mediated isothermal amplification) method has successfully 
been utilized for the diagnosis of Ascochyta rabiei L., Penicillium marneffei, and 
Ophiostoma clavatum (Sun et al., 2010). This technique offers a rapid and sensitive 
approach for detecting and identifying these specific microorganisms.

277

Fig 3: Principle of LAMP assay (Patel et al., 2022)

Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS): 

Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have revolutionized the field of 
genomics by providing high-throughput sequencing capabilities. NGS enables the 
sequencing of entire pathogen genomes, transcriptomes, and metagenomes. In plant 
pathology, NGS has been instrumental in identifying novel pathogens, studying 
pathogen populations, and unravelling host-pathogen interactions. RNA-Seq, a 
transcriptomic approach using NGS, allows for the identification and quantification 
of differentially expressed genes during infection.

Molecular techniques for plant disease management

RNA interference

RNA interference (RNAi) is a cellular process that regulates gene expression by 
silencing specific genes. The steps of RNA interference are as follows:

1.  dsRNA Formation: Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is introduced into the 
cell, either by exogenous delivery or through the transcription of a specific 
gene to produce dsRNA.

278

2.  Dicer Cleavage: An enzyme called Dicer recognizes the dsRNA and 
cleaves it into small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) that are typically 21-25 
nucleotides long.

3.  RISC Assembly: The siRNAs are then loaded onto the RNA-induced 
silencing complex (RISC), where one of the siRNA strands, known as the 
guide strand, is selected.

4.  Target Recognition: The guide siRNA within the RISC complex binds to 

the complementary mRNA sequence of the target gene.

5.  mRNA Degradation: The binding of the guide siRNA to the target mRNA 
triggers its degradation or prevents its translation into a functional protein

6.  Gene Silencing: The targeted gene effectively silenced, leading to a reduction 

or elimination of the corresponding protein’s expression.

Fig 4: RNAi-mediated gene silencing (Halder et al., 2022)

279

Table 2: RNAi-targeted editing in plants against fungi (Halder et al., 2022)

Fungi

Target gene

Plant

Phenotype

Puccinia triticina

PtMAPK1

Wheat

Significant  reduction  of 
fungal  growth  and disease 
suppression

Blumeria  graminis 
f.sp. tritici

MLO

F. graminearum

Wheat

Inhibition of fungal growth

Grain and legume 
crops

Significant reduction in
mycotoxin production

IRT containing 
mycotoxin 
regulatory 
sequences

Blumeria graminis Avra10

Barley and wheat

Inhibition of fungal growth

PnPMA1

Arabidopsis

Elucidation of a compatible 
interaction between
Arabidopsis and P. parasitica

GUS

Tobacco

Reduced expression of GUS

Glutathione 
S-transferase

Tobacco

Increase resistance of 
Nicotiana to infection

PSTha12J12

Barley and wheat

MAP  Kinase 
Bmp3

Lettuce

Botrytis cinerea

DCL1, DCL2

Tomato, Strawberry, 
Grape,  Lettuce, 
Onion, Rose

Significant  improvement  in 
rust resistance

Delay in conidial germination, 
reduction of necrotic lesions

Significant inhibition in gray 
mold disease

Botrytis cinerea

DND1

Botrytis cinerea

BcTOR

Tomato and Potato Reduced  susceptibility  to 
Botrytis

Arabidopsis, Potato, 
Tomato

Enhanced resistance against 
gray mold

Phytophthora 
parasitica

Fusarium 
verticillioides

Phytophthora 
parasitica var.
nicotianae

Puccinia  striiformis 
f. sp. tritici

Botrytis cinerea

 

280

Genome Editing:

In recent times, advanced breeding technologies like meganucleases (MNs), zinc-finger 
nucleases (ZFNs), transcription-activator-like (TAL) effector nucleases (TALENs), 
and clustered regularly interspaced palindromic repeats (CRISPR) have emerged. 
Among these, the CRISPR/Cas9 system has gained significant attention for enhancing 
disease resistance in various crops such as rice, cacao, wheat, tomato, and grape. This 
system enables precise editing of the genome through the activity of RNA-guided 
DNA endonucleases. Apart from crop genome editing, this technology has also shown 
promise in editing the genomes of fungal and oomycete pathogens, providing novel 
strategies for plant disease management. CRISPR/Cas tools have been successfully used 
to combat oomycete diseases by targeting specific genes, such as the PAMP-triggered 
immunity repressor AtERF019 (ethylene-responsive factor 19 gene), leading to increased 
resistance against Phytophthora parasitica in Arabidopsis thaliana. Applications of genome 
editing in developing disease-resistant plants, overcoming disease susceptibility factors 
and engineering plant defense mechanisms. (Paul et al., 2021)

Fig 5: The CRISPR/Cas9 targeting and subsequent non- homologous end joining (NHEJ) 
process exploited for development of pathogen resistance in plants (Das et al., 2019).

281

Table 3: Genome editing technologies for disease resistance in plants. (Yin and 
Qiu 2019)

DISEASE

NUCLEASE MUTATION

PATHOGEN

TARGET 
GENE

HOST 
PLANT

OsSWEET13/exon CRISPR/

deletions

SlDMR6-1/exon

deletions

tomato

citrus canker

CsLOB1/exon

In-dels

TaMLO/exon

TALEN

In-dels

TaEDR1/exon

In-dels

Xanthomonas oryzae 
pv. oryzae

rice

Pseudomonas 
syringae pv. tomato, 
Phytophthora capsici,
Xanthomonas spp.

Xanthomonas  citri 
subsp. citri

citrus

Blumeria graminis f. 
sp. tritici

Blumeria graminis f. 
sp. tritici

wheat

wheat

SlMlo1/exon

deletions

Oidium neolycopersici

tomato

replication origin

AZP

BSCTV

Arabidopsis

Rep

Rep

n.d.

n.d.

n.d.

T YLCCNV  and 
TbCSV

tobacco

TbCSV, TYCCNV 
and TLCYnV

tobacco

TYLCV,  BCTV, 
MeMV

tobacco

IR, CP, RCRII

In-dels

LIR, Rep

In-dels

BeYDV

tobacco

IR, CP, Rep

In-dels

BSCTV

IR, CP, Rep

In-dels

tobacco and 
Arabidopsis

tobacco

CLCuKoV, TYLCV, 
TYLCSV,  MeMV, 
B C T V - L o g a n , 
BCTV-Worland

C V Y V,  Z Y M V, 
PRSV-W

eIF4E/exon

deletions

cucumber

eIF(iso)4E/exon

In-dels

TuMV

Arabidopsis

Bacteria

rice bacterial 
blight

bacterial 
speck, 
phytophthora 
blight, 
bacterial spot

Fungi

powdery 
mildew

powdery 
mildew

powdery 
mildew

Viruses

DNA viral 
disease

DNA viral 
disease

DNA viral 
disease

DNA viral 
disease

DNA viral 
disease

DNA viral 
disease

DNA viral 
disease

RNA viral 
disease

RNA viral 
disease

Cas9

CRISPR/
Cas9

CRISPR/
Cas9

CRISPR/
Cas9

CRISPR/
Cas9

ZFN

TALE

CRISPR/
Cas9

CRISPR/
Cas9

CRISPR/
Cas9

CRISPR/
Cas9

CRISPR/
Cas9

CRISPR/
Cas9

282

RNA viral 
disease

RNA viral 
disease

RNA viral 
disease

nCBP-1&nCBP-2/
exon

CRISPR/
Cas9

ORF1a,  ORFCP 
and 3’-UTR

CRISPR/
Cas9

GFP, Hc-Pro and 
CP

CRISPR/
Cas13a

In-dels

CBSV

cassava

no cleavage

CMV

n.d.

TuMV

tobacco and 
Arabidopsis

tobacco

Conclusion

In the field of plant pathology, molecular techniques provided powerful tools for 
the detection, diagnosis and management of plant pathogens. Molecular methods 
have played a crucial role in the accurate identification of pathogens at the species 
or strain level, which is essential for disease surveillance and the development of 
targeted control measures. These techniques provided valuable insights into the 
genetic diversity, evolution and virulence factors of these pathogens. Such knowledge 
has facilitated the development of more effective disease management strategies. 
These advancements hold great promise for improving agricultural productivity and 
ensuring food security. By harnessing the power of molecular technologies, we can 
create a more resilient and sustainable agricultural system for the future.

References

Abdullah, A. S., Turo, C., Moffat, C. S., Lopez-Ruiz, F. J., Gibberd, M. R. and 
Hamblin, J. (2018). Real-time PCR for diagnosing and quantifying co-infection 
by two globally distributed fungal pathogens of wheat. Front. Plant Sci. 9: 1086.

Aslam, S., Tahir, A., Aslam, M. F., Alam, M. W., Shedayi, A. A. and Sadia, S. 
(2017). Recent advances in molecular techniques for the identification of 
phytopathogenic fungi–a mini review.  Journal of Plant Interactions, 12(1): 
493-504.

Bhat, R. G. and Browne, G. T. (2010). Specific detection of Phytophthora cactorum 
in diseased strawberry plants using nested polymerase chain reaction. Plant 
Pathol. 59: 121–129.

Bilska, K., Kulik, T., Ostrowska-Kołodziejczak, A., Busko, M., Pasquali, M. and 
Beyer, M. (2018). Development of a highly sensitive FcMito qPCR assay for 
the quantification of the toxigenic fungal plant pathogen Fusarium culmorum. 
Toxins 10 (5): 211.

Brewer, M. T., Turner, A. N., Brannen, P. M., Cline, W. O., and Richardson, E. A. 
(2014). Carnielli-Queiroz, L., Fernandes, P. M. B., Fernandes, A. A. R. and 
Ventura, J. A. (2019). A rapid and reliable method for molecular detection of 

283

Fusarium guttiforme, the Etiological Agent of Pineapple Fusariosis. Braz. Arch. 
Biol. Technol. 62, e19180591. Control, pp. 135–142.

Das, A., Sharma, N. and Prasad, M. (2019). CRISPR/Cas9: a novel weapon in the 

arsenal to combat plant diseases. Frontiers in Plant Science, 9: 2008.

Depotter, J. R. L., Rodriguez-Moreno, L., Thomma, B. P. H. A. and Wood, T. A. 
(2017). The Emerging British Verticillium longisporum Population consists of 
aggressive brassica pathogens. Phytopathology.107 (11): 1399–1405.

Doyle, V. P., Tonry, H. T., Amsden, B., Beale, J., Dixon, E. and Li, H. (2019). First report 

Exobasidium maculosum, a new species causing leaf and fruit spots on blueberry in 
the southeastern USA and its relationship with other Exobasidium spp. parasitic 
to blueberry and cranberry. Mycologia.106 (3): 415–423.

Faganello, F. D. S., Filho, R. C., Dias, V. D., Morello, R. M. S.C. and DaCunha, M. 
G. (2017). Molecular diagnosis of Guignardia citricarpa in asymptomatic sweet 
orange tissue. Rev. Bras. Frutic. 39 (4): e–518.

Faria, C. B., Abe, C. A., da Silva, C. N., Tessmann, D. J. and Barbosa-Tessmann, 
I. P. (2012). New PCR assays for the identification of Fusarium verticillioides, 
Fusarium subglutinans, and other species of the Gibberella fujikuroi complex. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 13 (1): 115–132.

Gautam, A. K., and Kumar, S. (2020). Techniques for the detection, identification, 
and diagnosis of agricultural pathogens and diseases. In Natural remedies for 
pest, disease and weed control (pp. 135-142). Academic Press.

Halder, K., Chaudhuri, A., Abdin, M. Z., Majee, M. and Datta, A. (2022). RNA 
interference for improving disease resistance in plants and its relevance in 
this clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats-dominated era 
in terms of dsrna-based biopesticides. Frontiers in Plant Science, 13: 885128.

Havis, N. D., Gorniak, K., Carmona, M. A., Formento, A. N., Luque, A. G. and 
Scandiani, M. M. (2014). First molecular detection of Ramularia leaf spot 
(Ramularia collocygni) in seeds and leaves of barley in Argentina. Plant Dis. 
98 (2): 277–277.

Hayden R, Qian X, Procop G, Roberts G and Lloyd R. (2002). In situ hybridization 
for the identification of filamentous fungi in tissue section. Diagn Mol Pathol. 
11(2):119–126.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymerase chain reaction.

Krishnamurthy PK and Francis R.A. (2012). A critical review on the utility of DNA 
barcoding in biodiversity conservation. Biodivers Conserv. 21 (8):1901–1919.

284

Li D. Z., Gao L. M., Li H. T., Wang H., Ge X. J., Liu J. Q., Chen Z. D., Zhou S. L., 
Chen S. L., Yang J. B. (2011). Comparative analysis of a large dataset indicates 
that internal transcribed spacer (ITS) should  be incorporated into the core 
barcode for seed plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 108 (49):19641–19646.

Ling, K. S., Wechter, W. P., Somai, B. M., Walcott, R. R. and Keinath, A. P. (2010). 
An improved real-time PCR system for broad-spectrum detection of Didymella 
bryoniae, the causal agent of gummy stem blight of cucurbits. Seed Sci. Technol. 
38 (3): 692–703. 

Mancini, V., Murolo, S. and Romanazzi, G. (2016). Diagnostic methods for detecting 

fungal pathogens on vegetable seeds. Plant Pathol. 65: 691–703.

Martinelli, F., Scalenghe, R., Davino, S., Panno, S., Scuderi, G., Ruisi, P. and Dandekar, 
A. M. (2015). Advanced methods of plant disease detection. A review. Agronomy 
for  Sustainable Development, 35: 1-25.

McCartney H. A., Foster S. J., Fraaije B. A. and Ward E. (2003). Molecular diagnostics 

for fungal plant pathogens. Pest Manag Sci. 59(2):129–142.

Meghvansi, M. K., Khan, M. H., Gupta, R. and Veer, V. (2013). Identification of a 
new species of Cercospora causing leaf spot disease in Capsicum assamicum in 
northeastern India. Res. Microbiol. 164 (9): 894–902.

Michalecka, M., Bryk, H., Poniatowska, A. and Puławska, J. (2016). Identification 
of Neofabraea species causing bull’s eye rot of apple in Poland and their direct 
detection in apple fruit using multiplex PCR. Plant Pathol. 65: 643–654.

Moffat, C. S., See, P. T. and Oliver, R. P. (2015). Leaf yellowing of the wheat cultivar 
Mace  in the absence of yellow spot disease. Australas. Plant Pathol. 44: 161–166.

Ndayihanzamaso, P., Karangwa, P., Mostert, D., Mahuku, G., Blomme, G.and Beed, 
F. (2020). The development of a multiplex PCR assay for the detection of 
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cubense lineage VI strains in East and Central Africa. 
Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 158: 495–509. 

Ndayihanzamaso, P., Karangwa, P., Mostert, D., Mahuku, G., Blomme, G., Beed, 
F. and Viljoen, A. (2020). The development of a multiplex PCR assay for the 
detection of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cubense lineage VI strains in East and 
Central Africa. European Journal of Plant Pathology, 158: 495-509. 

Okawa, K. (2015). Market and trade impacts of food loss and waste reduction. In: 
OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 75. OECD Publishing, Paris.

Patel, R., Mitra, B., Vinchurkar, M., Adami, A., Patkar, R., Giacomozzi, F. and Baghini, M. 
S. (2022). A review of recent advances in plant-pathogen detection systems. Heliyon.

285

Paul, N. C., Park, S. W., Liu, H., Choi, S., Ma, J., MacCready, J. S. and Sang, H. 
(2021). Plant and fungal genome editing to enhance plant disease resistance 
using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Frontiers in Plant Science, 12: 700925.

Pépin, N., Punja, Z. K. and Joly, D. L. (2018). Occurrence of powdery mildew caused 
by plant and fungal genome editing to enhance plant disease resistance using 
the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Front. Plant Sci. 12:70092.

Prasannath, K., Galea, V. J. and Akinsanmi, O. A. (2020). Characterisation of leaf 
spots caused by Neopestalotiopsis clavispora and Colletotrichum siamense in 
macadamia in Australia. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 156: 1219–1225.

Qi M and Yang Y. (2002). Quantification of Magnaporthe grisea during infection 
of rice plants using real-time polymerase chain reaction and northern blot/
phosphoimaging analyses.   Phytopathology. 92 (8):870–876.

Raj, M., Jeeva, M. L., Nath, V. S., Sankar, S., Vidhyadharan, P., Archana, P. V. and 
Hegde, V. (2013). A highly sensitive nested-PCR method using a single closed 
tube for the detection of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides causing greater yam 
anthracnose. Journal of Root Crops, 39(2): 163-167.

Sankaran, S., Mishra, A., Ehsani, R. and Davis, C. (2010). A review of advanced 
techniques for detecting plant diseases. Comput. Electron. Agric. 72 (1): 1–13.

Sato T., Takayanagi A., Nagao K., Tomatsu N., Fukui T., Kawaguchi M., Kudoh J., 
Amagai M., Yamamoto N. and Shimizu N. 2010. Simple PCR based DNA 
microarray system to identify human pathogenic fungi in skin. J Clin Microbiol. 
48(7):2357–2364.

Schoch C. L., Seifert K. A., Huhndorf S., Robert V., Spouge J. L., Levesque C. A., 
Chen W., Bolchacova  E., Voigt K. and Crous P., W. (2012). Nuclear ribosomal 
internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region as a universal DNA barcode marker 
for fungi. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 109(16): 6241–6246.

Sikdar, P., Okubara, P., Mazzola, M. and Xiao, C. L. (2014). Development of PCR 
assays for diagnosis and detection of the pathogens Phacidiopycnis washingtonensis 
and Sphaeropsis pyriputrescens in apple fruit. Plant Dis. 98 (2): 241–246

Singh A. and Kumar N. (2013). A review on DNA microarray technology. Int J 

Curr Res Rev. 5(22):01–05.

Sun J, Li X, Zeng H, Xie Z, Lu C, Xi L and De Hoog GS. (2010). Development and 
evaluation of loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) for the rapid 
diagnosis of Penicillium marneffei in archived tissue samples. FEMS Immunol 
Med Microbiol. 58(3):381–388.

286

Sun, G., Liu, J., Li, G., Zhang, X., Chen, T. and Chen, J. (2015). Quick and accurate 
detection and quantification of Magnaporthe oryzae in rice using realtime 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Plant Dis. 99: 219–224.

Wang, X., Tang, C., Chen, J., Buchenauer, H., Zhao, J., Han, Q. and Kang, Z. (2009). 
Detection of Puccinia striiformis in latently infected wheat leaves by nested 
polymerase chain reaction. Journal of phytopathology, 157(7‐8): 490-493.

Xu J. (2016). Fungal DNA barcoding. Genome. 59(11):913–932. 

Yang, X., Hameed, U., Zhang, A. F., Zang, H. Y., Gu, C. Y. and Chen, Y. (2017). 
Development of a nested-PCR assay for the rapid detection of Pilidiella granati 
in pomegranate fruit. Sci. Rep. 7: 40954.

Yin, K. and Qiu, J. L. (2019). Genome editing for plant disease resistance: applications 
and perspectives. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B. 374(1767): 
20180322.

Zhang N, McCarthy ML and Smart CD. (2008). A macroarray system for the 
detection of fungal and oomycete pathogens of solanaceous crops. Plant Dis. 
92(6):953–960.

Zhao, Y. Q., Wu, Y. H., Zhao, X. X., An, M. N. and Chen, J. G. (2014). Study on 
the Taqman real–time PCR to the detection and quantification of Rhizoctonia 
solani AG–3 of tobacco target spot. Adv. Mater. Res. 1010–1012: 80–83. 

287

18

General Characteristics and 

Structures of Fungi

Dr. Satish Sharma 1, Dr. S.K Arsia2, Dr. Arvinder Kaur3 and  Dr. Ashish Kumar 
Pandey4
1Assistant Professor ( Contractual basis) , Department of Plant Pathology,RVSKVV, 
B.M. College of Agriculture ,Khandwa (M.P)
2Assistant Professor & Head , Department of Plant Pathology, RVSKVV, B.M. 
College of Agriculture ,Khandwa (M.P)
3Senior Scientist Plant Protection, RVSKVV, at Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Gwalior
4Subject  Matter Specialist (Plant Protection) DRi LBS Krishi Vigyan Kendra, 
Gonda (U.P)

Abstract

Fungi are eukaryotic, spore bearing, achlorophyllous, heterotrophic organisms that 
generally reproduce sexually and asexually and whose filaments are branched somatic 
structures are typically surrounded by cell walls containing chitin or cellulose or 
both with many organic molecules and exhibiting absorptive nutrition to obtain 
nourishment i. e., for nutrition to resist or tolerate in unfavorable conditions for 
their survival i.e., over wintering, over summering for reproduction.

Keywords: Fungi characteristics, somatic structures and fungal nutrition.

Introduction

Mycology (Mycetology- Greek grammer): It is the Science which deals with study 
of fungi. Term Mycology derived from 2 Greek words. Mykes= mushroom / fungus, 
logos= discourse or study. The term Fungus is derived from a Latin word fungor 
= to flourish. Study of fungi started with study of mushrooms because of their 
macroscopic size and brilliant color. Mushrooms attracted the attention of ancient 
people,and they started studying them out of curiosity. Fungi are eukaryotic, spore 

288

bearing, achlorophyllous. Pathogen is an entity usually a micro organism that can 
incite disease in susceptible plants. It is also referred to as incitant, causal agent or 
causal organism. Its branched somatic structures are typically surrounded by cell walls 
containing chitin or cellulose or both with many organic molecules and exhibiting 
absorptive nutrition. Fungal cells are typically eukaryotic and lack chloroplasts. Cell 
is bounded by cell wall, which provides rigidity and shape to the cell is the outermost 
membrane of cell consisting of more than one layer with fibrous structure and made 
up of chitin or cellulose or both.

Somatic structures

Thallus/ Soma Commonly called as vegetative body or fungal body. A thallus( 
pl. thalli) is a simple, entire body of the fungus devoid of chlorophyll with no 
differentiation into stem, roots and leaves lacking vascular system.

Hypha (hypha=web) ( pl. hyphae) : Hypha is a thin, transparent, tubular filament 
filled with protoplasm.It is the unit of a filamentous thallus and grows by apical 
elongation.

Mycelium( pl. mycelia): A net work of hyphae ( aggregation of hyphae) constituting 
the filamentous thallus of a fungus.It may be colourless i.e., hyaline or coloured due 
to presence of pigments in cell wall.The mycelium may be ectophytic or endophytic.

Types of fungal thalli:

1.Plasmodium (plasma = moulded body): It is a naked,multinucleate mass of 
protoplasm moving and feeding in amoeboid fashion . Eg. Plasmodiophora brassicae.

2.Unicellular thallus:consisting of a single cell. Eg.Chytrids, Synchytrium

3.Multi cellular or filamentous thallus: Majority of fungi i.e., a true fungi are 
filamentous, consisting of a number of branched, thread like filaments called hyphae.
Eg.Many fungi,Alternaria.

Fungi based on reproductive structures:

Holocarpic (holos=whole+karpos=fruit): If the thallus is entirely converted into 
one or more reproductive structures, such thallus is called holocarpic thallus.
Eg.Synchytrium

Eucarpic(Eu=good+karpos=fruit):If the thallus is differentiated into a vegetative 
part which absorbs nutrients and a reproductive part which forms reproductive 
structures, such thallus is called eucarpic thallus. Eg.Pythium

Ectophytic fungus: If the fungal thallus is present on the surface of the host 
plant, it is called ectophytic.Eg. Oidium .

289

Endophytic fungus: If the fungus penetrates into the host cell / present inside the 
host, it is called endophytic.Eg. Puccinia. Endophytic fungus may be intercellular 
(hypha grows in between the cells), or intra cellular ( hypha penetrates into host 
cell).Eg.Ustilago, or vascular (xylem vessels) Eg. Fusarium oxysporum.  Inter cellular 
hyphae produce special organs called haustoria which penetrate the host cell and 
absorb food. These are absent in intracellular hyphae. Endophytic intra cellular 
mycelium absorbs food directly from protoplasm without any specialized structures. 
In ectophytic mycelium, haustoria are produced in epidermal cells.  Septation in 
Fungi :(septum=hedge/partition) ( pl.septa). Some fungal hyphae are provided with 
partitions or cross walls which divide the fungus into a number of compartments /
cells. These cross walls are called septa.

Aseptate hypha/coenocytic hypha: ( Koinos=common,kytos=hollow vessel) A 
hypha with out septa is called aseptate /non-septate/ coenocytic hypha wherein the 
nuclei are embedded in cytoplasm.Eg. lower fungi like Oomycetes and Zygomycetes.

Septate hypha: A hypha with septa or cross walls is called septate hypha. Eg.common 
in higher fungi like Ascomycotina, Basidiomycotina and Deuteromycotina 

General types of septa

1.Based on formation:

a) Primary septa: These are formed in direct association with nuclear division 
(mitotic or meiotic) and are laid down between daughter nuclei separating the nuclei 
/cells. Eg. Higher fungi like Ascomycotina and Basidiomycotina.

b) Adventitious septa: These are formed independent of nuclear division and these 
are produced to delimit the reproductive structures. Eg. lower fungi like Oomycetes 
and Zygomycetes in which septa are produced below gametangia (sex organs) which 
separate them from rest of the cells.

2. Based on construction:

a) Simple septa: It is most common which is a plate like, with or without perforation.

b) Complex septa: A septum with a central pore surrounded by a barrel shaped 
swelling of the septal wall and covered on both sides by a perforated membrane 
termed the septal pore cap or parenthosome. Eg. Dolipore septum in Basidiomycotina.

290

3.Based on perforation:

a) Complete septa: A Septum is a solid plate without any pore or perforations. Eg. 
Adventitious septa in lower fungi.

b) Incomplete septa: A septum with a central pore.

Fungal tissues: Plectenchyma :( plekein=to weave+enchyma=infusion) Fungal 
tissues are called plectenchyma i.e., mycelium becomes organized into loosely 
or compactly woven tissue. This tissue compose various types of vegetative and 
reproductive structures.

Types of plectenchyma:

1.Prosenchyma: It is a loosely woven tissue. The component hyphae retain their 

291

individuality which can be easily distinguishable as hyphae and lie parallel to one 
another.Eg. Trauma in Agaricus.

2. Pseudoparenchyma:It is compactly woven tissue. It consists of closely packed 
cells which are isodiametric or oval in shape resembling parenchymatous cells of 
plants and hence the name. The component hyphae loose their individuality and are 
not distinguishable as hyphae. Eg. Sclerotial bodies of Sclerotium and rhizomorph 
of Armillariella.

A.Prosenchyma B.Pseudoparenchyma

Purpose:

1. To obtain nourishment i. e., for nutrition.

2. To resist or tolerate unfavourable conditions for their survival i.e., over wintering, 
Over summering.

3. for reproduction.

1. Rhizomorphs: ( rhiza=root, morph=shape) Thick strands of somatic hyphae in 
which the hyphae loose their individuality and form complex tissues that are resistant 
to adverse conditions and remain dormant until favourable conditions return. The 
structure of growing tip of rhizomorphs res emble that of a root tip, hence the name 
rhizomorph. Eg. Armillariella mellea.

292

2. Sclerotium: (skleron=hard) pl.sclerotia: It is a hard, round ( looks like mustard 
seed)/ cylindrical or elongated (Claviceps ) dark coloured ( black or brown )resting 
body formed due to aggregation of mycelium, the component hyphae loose their 
individuality , resistant to unfavourable conditions and remain dormant for a longer 
period of time and germinate on the return of favourable conditions. Eg. Sclerotium, 
Rhizoctonia .

3. Stroma: (stroma=mattress) pl.stromata. It is a compact somatic structure looks 
like a  attress or a cushion on which or in which fructifications ( spores or fruiting 
bodies ) are usually formed.

a. Sub stomatal stroma: cushion like structure formed below epidermis in sub 
stomatal region from which sporophores are produced. Eg. Cercospora  personata.

b. Perithecial stroma: When reproductive bodies like perithecia of some fungi are 
embedded characteristically throughout periphery of stroma, such stroma are called 
perithecial stroma. Eg.Claviceps, Xylaria.

4. Haustorium: ( hauster=drinker) pl.haustoria.It is a outgrowth of somatic hyphae 
regarded as special absorbing organ produced on certain hyphae by parasitic fungi 
for obtaining nourishment by piercing into living cells of host. They may be knob 
like( Albugo), elongated ( Erysiphe, Uncinula), finger like ( Peronospora ).

5.Rhizoids: (rhiza=root, oeides=like) These are slender root like branched structures 
found in the substratum produced by some fungi which are useful for anchoring 
the thallus to substratum and for obtaining nourishment from the substrate.Eg. 
Rhizopus stolonifer.

6. Appresorium: (apprimere=to press against) pl.appressoria A flattened tip of 
hyphae or germ tube acting as pressing organ by attaching to the host surface and 
gives rise to a minute infection peg which usually grows and penetrates the epidermal 
cells of the host. Eg. Puccinia, Colletotrichum, Erysiphe.

Fungal cell :

Fungal cells are typically eukaryotic and lack chloroplasts. Cell is bounded by cell 
wall, which provides rigidity and shape to the cell is the outermost membrane of 
cell consisting of more than one layer with fibrous structure and made up of chitin 
or cellulose or both.

293

The layer surrounding the cytoplasm is called cytoplasmic membrane or 
plasmalemma. Protoplasm contains a true nucleus surrounded by two layered 
membrane with nucleolus, cytoplasm and other inclusions.

Endoplasmic reticulum is not well developed, and it may be rough atudded with 
ribosomes or smooth with out ribosomes.

Vacuoles in which metabolic products are accumulated are bounded by a membrane 
called tonoplast . Ribosomes are protenaceous bodies scattered all over cytoplasm, 
play a role in protein synthesis. Mitochondria are the sites of respiratory activities. 
Lomasomes are the swollen membranous structures of plasmalemma. Cytoplasm 
also contains fat particles, calcium oxalate crystals, resins, glycogen.

Fungal nutrition:

Fungi are heterotrophic with holophytic nutrition( absorptive type). The essential 
elements for fungi are, C, H, O, N, P, K, S, Zn, Fe, Mg, Mn, Mo, Cu and Ca. Reserve 
food material in the c ell may be either fat or carbohydrates. Fats may be present in 
the form of oil drops and carbohydrates in the form of glycogen or sugars. Starch 
is never present in the fungal cell.

294

Groups of fungi based on mode of nutrition:

1. Saprophytes: ( sapros=rotten, phytos=plant ) Organisms which obtain nutrition 
on from dead organic matter either completely or for a part of their life. A large 
number of fungi fall under this category. Eg. Saprolegnia, Rhizopus, Mucor, Alternaria.

a. Obligate saprophytes: (obligare =to bind it self ) Organisms which can never 
grow on living organisms or can never obtain their food from living source. They 
get their food only from dead organic matter. Eg. Mucor, Agaricus .

b. Facultative parasite: (facultas=ability) Organisms which are usually

saprophytic but have ability to become as parasites. Eg. Pythium aphanidermatum, 
Fusarium solani, Rhizoctonia solani.

2.Parasites: Organisms which live within or out side another organisms for their 
nutrition either completely or for a part of their life .

Pathogen : If a parasite damages the host then they are called as pathogens..

All pathogens are not parasites and all parasites need not be pathogens .

a. Obligate parasites: (Organisms which obtain food only from living organisms 
( living protoplasm) and can never derive their food from dead organic matter or 
artificial medium. Eg. Puccinia graminis , Plasmopara viticola .

b. Facultative saprophytes: Organisms which are usually parasites but have ability 
to become saprophytes .Eg. Ustilago maydis

Classification of fungi based on sex :

1. Monoecious fungi / hermaphroditic fungi: ( mono=single,oikos=home) The 
fungi which produce distinguishable male and female sex organs on the same thallus, 
which may or may not be compatible are called monoecious/ hermaphroditic fungi. 
Eg. Pythium aphanidermatum.

2. Dioecious fungi: (di=two, oikos=home) The fungi which produce distinguishable 
male and female sex organs on two different thalli ie., there will be separate male 
and female thalli . Eg. Phytophthora infestans

Classification of fungi based on compatibility 

Homothallic fungi: Fungi in which both sexes occur on same thallus, which can 
reproduce sexually by it self with out the aid of another thallus ie., self compatible 
/ self fertile are called homothallic fungi.

Eg. Pythium aphanidermatum.

Heterothallic fungi: A fungal species consisting of self sterile (self incompatible) 

295

thallus requiring the union of two compatible thalli for sexual reproduction, regardless 
of the possible presence of both male and female organs on the same thallus. 
Heterothallic fungi are dioecious

Eg. Phytophthora infestans.

Different types of sexual spores :Sexual spores are formed after meiosis,hence also 
called meiospores. 1.Oospores 2.Zygospores 3.Ascospores 4.Basidiospores

1.Oospore: A thick walled sexual resting spore produced by the union of two 
morphologically different gametangia. Eg.Pythium, Phytophthora , members of class 
Oomycetes.

2. Zygospore: A thick walled sexual resting spore produced by the fusion of 
two morphologically similar gametangia. Eg.Rhizopus , members of sub-division 
Zygomycotina

3. Ascospore:Sexual spore produced in a specialized sac like like structure known 
as ascus. Generally 8 ascospores are formed. Eg.Erysiphe,members of sub-division 
Ascomycotina.

4.Basidiospore:Sexual spore produced on a club shaped structure known as 
basidium.Generally 4 basidiospores are formed.Eg.Puccinia, members of sub-division 
Basidiomycotina.

Various Life cycle patterns displayed by fungi:

1. Haplobiontic life cycle 2. Diplobiontic life cycle

1. Haplobiontic life cycle: If there is only one free living thallus, which is haploid or 
diploid in life cycle of a fungus, it is called as haplobiontic life cycle. ( long haploid 
somatic phase and short diploid phase confined to zygote cell, which undergoes 
meiosis immediately after karyogamy and develop ascospores ) Eg. Schizosaccharomyces 
octosporus.

2. Diplobiontic life cycle: If haploid thallus alternates with a diploid thallus, the 
life cycle is called diplobiontic life cycle, which has a long diploid somatic phase 
and a very short haplo Id phase. Eg. Saccharomyces ludwigii

Phases in Sexual reproduction:.There are 3 phases in sexual reproduction.

1. Plasmogamy: union of two protoplasts takes place.As a result of it the two nuclei 
come together within the same cell.

2. Karyogamy: union of 2 sexually compatible nuclei brought together by plasmogamy 
to form a diploid nucleus (2n) i.e., zygote.

3. Meiosis: This is reduction division . The number of chromosomes is reduced to 

296

haploid ( n ) i.e., diploid nucleus results into haploid nucleus..

In lower fungi (Phycomycetes -Mastigomycotina and Zygomycotina) plasmogamy, 
karyogamy and meiosis occurs at regular intervals / sequence i.e.,karyogamy follows 
immediately after plasmogamy. In higher fungi (Ascomycotina, Basidiomycotina), 
karyogamy is delayed, as a result the nuclei remain in pairs ( dikaryotic phase- n+ 
n condition), which may be brief or prolonged.

Dikaryon : A pair of genetically different nuclei, lying side by side with out fusion 
for a considerable period of time is called dikaryon.A cell containing dikaryon is 
called dikaryotic cell. And the process is known as dikaryogamy

Conclusion

Plant diseases caused by micro organisms are of param ount importance to humans 
because they damage plants and plant products on which human depend for food, 
clothing, furniture and housing. for nutrition to resist or tolerate in unfavorable 
conditions for their survival i.e., over wintering, over summering for reproduction. 
A net work of hyphae ( aggregation of hyphae) constituting the filamentous thallus 
of a fungus.It may be colourless i.e., hyaline or coloured due to presence of pigments 
in cell wall.The mycelium may be ectophytic or endophytic. The essential elements 
for fungi are, C, H, O, N, P, K, S, Zn, Fe, Mg, Mn, Mo, Cu and Ca.Reserve food 
material in the c ell may be either fat or carbohydrates. Fats may be present in the 
form of oil drops and carbohydrates in the form of glycogen or sugars. Starch is 
never present in the fungal cell.

References

Eastern  Ltd, New York.

Delhi.

Alexopoulos, C.J., Mims C.W. and Blackwell M. 1996. Introductory Mycology. Wiley 

Mandahar, C.L. 1987. Introduction to Plant Viruses. Chand and Co Pvt Ltd, New 

Mehrotra, R.S. and Aneja, K.R. 1990. An Introduction to Mycology. New Age 

International  (P) Ltd, New Delhi.

Singh, R.S. 1982. Plant Pathogens - The Fungi. Oxford & IBM Publishing Co. Pvt. 

Singh, R.S. 1989. Plant Pathogens - The Prokaryotes. Oxford & IBM Publishing Co. 

Ltd., New  Delhi.

Pvt.  Ltd., New Delhi.

297

19

Causal Organisms for Plant 

Diseases and its Symptoms

1Dr Ashish kumar Pandey,  2Dr. Satish Sharma,  3Sudhanshu and  4Pushpendra 
Singh Gurjar
1Subject Matter Specialist (Plant Protection), DRI LBS Krishi Vigyan Kendra, 
Gonda (U.P.) India
2Assistant Professor (Contractual basis), Department of Plant Pathology, B. M. 
College of Agriculture Khandwa
3Subject Matter Specialist (Agricultural Extension), DRI LBS Krishi Vigyan Kendra, 
Gonda (U.P.) India
4Subject Matter Specialist (Horticulture), DRI LBS Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Gonda 
(U.P.) India

Abstract 

Plant pathology is a very important area of plant sciences because of its key role 
in sustainability of crop production and productivity. The chapter Fundamentals of 
Plant Pathology has been written to meet the needs of students for plant pathology 
courses at various levels of graduate and postgraduate studies. For understanding plant 
pathology, it is essential to know the basic aspects like pathogens, disease development, 
plant defiance mechanisms against pathogens and disease management. This chapter  
all the basic aspects of plant pathology viz., importance of plant diseases; scope and 
objectives of plant pathology; history of plant pathology; terms and concepts in plant 
pathology; pathogenesis; disease development; plant pathogens: Fungi, bacteria, 
fastidious vascular bacteria, phytoplasmas, spiroplasmas, virus, viroid, algae, protozoa, 
phanerogamic parasites and nematodes; classification of diseases and pathogens; 
symptomatology of biotic and abiotic stresses, growth and reproduction of plant 
pathogens; liberation, dispersal and survival of plant pathogens; types of parasitism 

298

and variability in plant pathogens, pathogenesis, role of enzymes, toxins and growth 
regulators in disease development; defence mechanism in plants; epidemiology and 
disease forecasting; principles and methods of plant disease management; nature, 
chemical combination, classification, mode of action and formulations of fungicides 
and antibiotics against pathogens. This chapter is very useful for students, teachers 
and researchers.

Keywords: Causal Organisms of Plant diseases, Symptoms, Disease cycle and 
Control measures.

Introduction

Fungi are a group of such plants which lack root system and chlorophyll. Hence, 
they lack the capacity of mineral absorption and photosynthesis. They obtain their 
nutrition from other living or dead plants and animals. Most fungi are saprophytic, 
i.e., they obtain their nutrition from dead organic matter. There are certain fungi 
which obtain their nutrition from living cells. These are known as parasitic fungi. 
These fungi also affect the physiological processes of the host. The toxins produced by 
certain fungi cause morphological deformity in the host. Such effects of the parasite 
appear in the host plant in the form of disease symptoms.The late blight epidemics of 
the 1840s triggered the Irish potato famine, but the history of the potato as a food 
crop is much older. The potato (Solanum tuberosum) originated in the highlands of 
the Andes in the Lake Titicaca area between Bolivia and Peru, where native people 
had selected hundreds of different cultivars for centuries. Most scientists agree that 
Phytophtora infestans originated in Mexico where both mating types of the fungus 
are commonplace. Where and how the plant and the pathogen first came together 
is not certain, but late blight epidemics seem to be described in the northeastern 
U.S. in about 1843 and Europe in 1845. Potato crops failed for a number of years 
during the cool and rainy “hungry ‘40s.” Although poor people who were dependent 
on  potatoes  for  food  suffered  in  many  areas,  the  disaster was greatest in Ireland. 
One and one-half million people starved and a similar number emigrated during the 
famine, resulting in a large Irish diaspora in many parts of North America. As with 
many famines, politics enhanced the suffering. Many Irish peasants grew cereal crops 
to pay their  rent. Although the grain was harvested, it could not be eaten, and was 
exported to the English landlords throughout the famine. In the 1990s, many exhibits 
and gatherings in North America and Ireland commemorated the 150th anniversary 
of the famine. One  reason  that  the  early  history  of  late  blight  is  unclear  is  that 
the germ theory of disease had not yet been accepted. Many preliminary studies of 
various plant diseases had been conducted, but Anton de Bary’s (the “father of plant 
pathology”) conclusive studies finally convinced the scientific community that the 

299

white sporulation of P. infestans on infected plants was the causal agent of the disease 
and not the result of spontaneous generation from the decaying vegetation. Thus, 
late blight signifies the official beginning of the science of plant pathology. These 
early studies also contributed to Louis Pasteur’s germ theory which was proposed 
15 years later. Red rot is one of the major constraints in the profitable cultivation 
of  sugarcane  in  many states  of  India.  Except  Maharashtra,  the  disease  has  been 
recorded in all the states. This disease drastically retards the yield and considerably 
deteriorates the juice quantity and quality thus hitting both the cane growers and 
millers. Many good varieties have gone out of cultivation due to red rot. Loose smut 
of wheat is a common disease throughout the wheat-growing regions of the world. 
The mycelium remains dormant in the embryo, and developing kernels are replaced 
by black teliospores. No seeds develop in infected heads. The disease is spread by 
windblown teliospores. Cool, humid weather favors the development of this disease. 
Some of the important fungal diseases of plants are discussed in this chapter.

Late Blight of Potato

The late blight is one of the destructive diseases of potato. It is the most serious of all 
the potato diseases when conditions are favourable for its spread. The famous Irish 
famine of 1845-46 was due largely to the failure of potato crop due to late blight 
infection. In India, the disease was first introduced into the Nilgiri hills between 
1870 and 1880 and very soon, it spread to Darjeeling in the Himalayan ranges. The 
first severe outbreaks of the disease were reported between 1912 and 1928 from 
Assam, Bengal and Bihar. In northern India, the disease was first reported from 
the plains of western U.P. Since then, the disease appears as a regular feature in the 
plains causing severe losses to the potato crop.

.Leaves, stems and tuber showing late blight symptoms

300

Symptoms

The  symptoms  of  the  disease  can  be  seen  on  any  part  of  the  plant,  viz., 
leaves, petioles, stems and tubers .On the leaves, the symptoms appear in the form of 
dark brown, oval or irregular water soaked areas. In the early stages, the symptoms 
develop at the tips or the margins of the old leaves. The infection spreads vigorously 
when temperature is low and atmosphere is humid, and soon appears in the form of 
blight. In case of severe infection,practically all the parts of the host become brown 
and then degenerate. After the tops have been blighted, the infection reaches to the 
underground tubers. In the infected tubers, the skin becomes slightly sunken and 
dark in colour. If conditions are humid, the cells of  the  tuber  become  soft  and 
dark  brown.  This  symptom is  known  as wet  rot. In  dry atmosphere, however, 
the potato pulp does not rot but its anterior part becomes black. This condition is 
called dry rot.

Morphology of the causal organism

The  disease  is  caused  by  Phytophthora  infestans. The  mycelium  is  endophytic 
consisting of hyaline, profusely branched coenocytic hyphae. The hyphae develop 
intercellularly and form haustoria. Ovoid or lemon-shaped sporangia are produced 
on sporangiophores. The sporangia are at first terminal but become lateral due to 
sympodial branching of the sporangiophore. The sporangium may germinate directly, 
forming a germ tube at the apex or its protoplasmic contents divide to form a 
number of  biflagellate zoospores which emerge through the papilla. The method 
of germination is much governed by temperature; low temperature favours zoospores 
formation, whereas higher temperature is responsible for the germ tube development. 
Sexual reproduction is oogamous type. The antheridium is somewhat elongated and 
amphigynous, whereas the oogonium is pear-shaped to almost spherical, smooth and 
reddish brown in colour. The fusion of egg and male nucleus results in the formation 
of a diploid oospore. The oospore germinates by producing a germ tube and the tip 
of which tube ultimately develops in to a sporangium.

Disease cycle

The infected tubers are the main source of infection. Thedormant mycelium in the 
tubers becomes active and grows upward in the stem and sporulates on small shoots. 
Epiphytotics of the disease are likely to occur when unusually cool weather combined 
with abundant moisture prevails at the time the sporangia are being produced. The 
optimum temperature for the sporulation is 21˚C. The sporangia germinate giving rise 
to zoospores at 12˚C and by germ tube, 21˚C. 100 percent relative humidity causes 
abundant production of sporangia. Sporangia are easily detached and disseminated 

301

by rain or air. On reaching a suitable host, the sporangia germinate either by germ 
tubes or by zoospores depending upon the environmental conditions. The spores from 
the blighted leaves are washed down into the soil where they penetrate to different 
depths reaching the healthy tubers. Contact of healthy tubers with diseased leaves 
at the harvesting time is another source of tuber infection.

Several theories have been put forth to explain the yearly occurrence of late 
blight; but (i) persistence of mycelium in the affected tubers, and (ii) survival of fungus 
in the fruiting stage or as dormant mycelium in the tubers left in the field from the 
preceding crop,  constituting the primary inoculum are the most accepted ones. In 
Indian climatic conditions,  the possibility of survival of the pathogen through soil 
in any form is very remote. Thus, it seems the infected seed tubers are responsible 
for the spread of the disease.

Phytophthorainfestans causing late blight disease of Potato (Disease cycle)

Control measures

 » Healthy seed tubers.

The late blight can be effectively controlled by the following methods:

302

Field sanitation.

 »
 » Delayed harvesting and sorting potatoes from a blighted field.
 » Tuber treatment before storage.
 »
 » Use of disease-resistant varieties, like Kufri red, Kufrineela, Kufrikundan, etc.
 »
Foliar spray of fungicides like Bordeaux mixture, Dithane Z-78, Fytolan, 
Blitox, etc.

Storage in a cool, dry and well aerated store house.

 » Good  late  blight  management  practices  include  disease  prevention, 
sanitation,  cultural practices, field monitoring, an effective fungicide spray 
program and postharvest protection.

Sanitation, Cultural Practices and Field Monitoring

Plant disease-free seed. Inspect seed potatoes within 24 hours of delivery. Cut a 
sample of tubers and look for the reddish brown dry rot characteristic of late blight 
tuber rot.

Test the seed lots for late blight before planting. When purchasing seed, it is 
recommended to have them tested for the absence of blighted seed by an authorized 
provincial service in your region.

Grade seed potatoes after being cut to remove any late blight infected tubers. 

Infected tubers can be a potential source of early infections in the field.

Frequently disinfect seed cutting equipment.

Immediately after cutting, treat seed with a recommended mancozeb-based 

seed piece fungicide.

Bury cull piles before crop emergence. Infected tubers in cull and rock dump 
piles are a major source of infection for the new crop. Buried tubers may germinate 
and grow. Rogue or treat volunteer plants with a herbicide. Slivers and pieces of 
potato remaining from cutting operations should also be buried.

Volunteer potato plants can be a source of infection. Any volunteer potato 
plants in a field should be removed by rouging or using herbicides. For non-seed 
fields where late blight is found, consider applying a sprout inhibitor to control 
volunteers in the following year.

Controlling late blight susceptible Solanacaeous weeds such as hairy nightshade, 
in potato as well as in non-potato crops is an important measure of controlling late 
blight incidence in potato.

303

Immediately report any suspected incidence of late blight to your extension 
specialist or to the nearest agricultural center. If late blight is identified, roguers and 
other workers should wear pants and boots which can be disinfected (e.g. Bleach 
solution diluted 1:9 with water; or other disinfectants) between different fields. 
Equipment should also be washed  and disinfected before entering adjoining fields.

Construction of a deep hill may help restrict spores from washing down through 

the soil and infecting the developing tubers.

Weather conditions favorable for late blight development can be determined 
using late blight forecasting models that use relative humidity, rainfall and temperature 
data. The weather data is converted into units called “severity values” for the purpose 
of predicting late blight outbreaks. Consult your extension specialist for information 
on late blight forecasts for your area.

Monitor your crop. Scout fields with special attention to low spots and along 
tree edges where moisture persists after rains or dews. Have a good look at stems 
and leaves for late blight symptoms. Stem infections will be diminished during dry 
periods but will be re- activated in humid weather.

When late blight is first identified, top kill or rogue an area twice the size of 
the infected area. All rogued infected plants should be put in plastic bags and then 
taken out of the field.

Rolling  or  rotobeating  a  crop  before  top  killing  would  expose  the  soil  and 
lower  canopy to drying. Rolling also seals cracks in the soil and may reduce tuber 
infections.

Top kill at least 2 weeks prior to harvest to allow time for infected tubers to 
rot and to promote tuber maturity and thicker skins at harvest. Vines should be 
completely dead at harvest. 16. Late blight causing spores survive longer in wet soils. 
Harvest when the soil surface is dry or wind row the potatoes and allow the surface 
of tubers to dry before harvest.

Dig potential problem areas such as sprayer rows and low areas last and store 

these potatoes where they can be easily moved out in case of a problem.

Wet or bruised tubers are more likely to get infected with late blight. Skinned 
or cut and bruised areas are direct entry points for late blight and other diseases. 
However, wound is not always a requirement to occur an infection on wet tubers.

Grade out any obviously diseased potatoes before they are put into storage.

If late blight is seen on the foliage, there will also likely be tuber infections. 
Immediately following harvest, these tubers should be ventilated with a high volume 

304

of air at low humidity until the surface of the potatoes is dry. This may lead to higher 
shrinkage than normal, but losses due to storage rots will be reduced.

Potato lots with 5% or more late blight infections (by weight) should be stored 
in the front of the storage or in separate bins, so they can be easily removed in a 
high risk situation.

Postharvest treatment with fungicides containing phosphorous acid will protect 
healthy tubers from pink rot or late blight infections occurring at harvest. Ensure 
even coverage with the fungicide. Follow label rate and recommendations.

Fungicide Spray Programme:

A preventive spray program is always recommended. Effective control by fungicides 
requires good coverage of the foliage, proper rates and timing of applications. Generally, 
fungicides are most effective in the early stages of infections before symptoms appear. 
However, no fungicide can cure an established infection. Fungicides against late 
blight are essentially protectants and not particularly persistent. They must be used 
to protect plants as prophylactic sprays in routine programmes, in an overall strategy 
designed to prevent the disease infecting the crop.

Contact fungicides retain on the surface of the plant where these are applied 
and only protect the plant where the spray is deposited or subsequently re-distributed 
by moisture. Contact fungicides are not taken into the plant and therefore are 
vulnerable to erosion by wind, rain and degradation by sunlight. They do not protect 
new plant growth formed after the spray has been applied. These fungicides have no 
effect against already established late blight infections.

Translaminar fungicides are absorbed by the leaves and show limited redistribution 
from upper sprayed surface to lower unsprayed surface. They are generally more rainfast 
than contact fungicides, but do not move within the plant to protect the new growth.

Systemic fungicides are absorbed into plant tissue and may offer some  after-
infection activity. Very few fungicides are truly systemic (i.e., move freely throughout 
the plant); however, some are upwardly systemic (i.e., move only upward in the plant 
through xylem tissue), and some are locally systemic (i.e., move into treated leaves 
and redistribute to some degree within the treated area of the plant.

305

RED ROT OF SUGARCANE

Red rot of sugarcane is a serious disease prevalent wherever sugarcane is grown in 
the world. The disease was first described in Java in 1893 under the name red smut. 
In 1906, Butler reported the disease symptoms in several cane varieties in India and 
renamed it as red rot. Serious Epiphytotics of this disease have occurred in Northern 
India (U.P., and Bihar during 1939-40 and 1946-47). However, localized epidemics 
occur almost every year.

Symptoms

The disease appears on all aerial parts of the plant. The early symptoms of the disease 
are yellowing and drooping of leaves. The stems show little indication of the disease 
in early stages but as severity of the disease increases the cane splits lengthwise and 
subsequently red blotchesappear throughout the length of the cane. These blotches 
emit a peculiar smell of alcohol fermentation. The reddening appears mainly in the 
vascular region. Ultimately, the cane becomes dull in appearance, get rotten and 
shrinks at the internodes. Besides, the conspicuous symptoms also appear on the 
leaves. On the mid-ribs of leaves, infection originates as a dark reddish area which 
elongates rapidly, forming blood-red lesions with dark margins. In later conditions, 
the centre of the lesions becomes straw coloured. 

   

Yellowing and drooping of leaves and reddening of stems shows the Red rot 
disease in Sugarcane

Morphology of the causal organism

The red rot of sugarcane is caused by Colletotricum falcatum.  The perfect  stage of this 
fungus has been described in Ascomycetes as Glomerella tucumanensis. The mycelium 
is inter-or intracellular, profusely branched, septate and contains characteristic oil 
droplets. In later stages the hyphae closely interwine with one another and form 
small stromata under the host epidermis. The fungus reproduces asexually by the 
formation of conidia developed in acervuli. The conidiophores are usually aseptate, 
unbranched and are arranged compactly like palisade tissue. Usually a single conidium 
develops at the tip of each conidiophore but occasionally the conidia are produced 

306

in acrogenous chains. The conidia are hyaline, crescent or sickle-shaped. An oil drop 
is present in the centre of each conidium. The conidia germinate by producing 1 to 
4 germ tubes and form the new mycelium.

Perithecia are globose and are produced on the various part of the host, and 
measure 150-300µm in diameter. Asci are numerous, hyaline, clavate and measure 50-
60 × 7-10.5µm. Each ascus contains eight ascospores arranged biserially. Intermixed 
with asci are present numerous delicate paraphysis. New physiological races differing 
in their pathogenicity to sugarcane cultivars have been frequently reported from 
different parts of the world.

Disease cycle

Seed sets from diseased canes are the chief means of survival and annual occurrence 
of the disease. Once, the pathogen establishes, secondary spread occurs by conidia. 
Ratoon crops also serve as a source of perennation and inoculum multiplication. 
High humidity, water-logging conditions, lack of proper cultural operations and 
continuous cultivation of same variety year after year are the main factors responsible 
for the development of the disease.

Control measures

The following measures may be adopted for the control of red rot of sugarcane:

 » Healthy seed selection.
 » Cultural practices-ratooning results in the multiplication of the disease, 

hence it must be discouraged.

Field sanitation and crop rotation.

 »
 » Use of resistant varieties like Co 846, 951, 975, 1007, 1148, 62101, 62399, 

S109, BO22, 22, COLK 7702, 7710, etc.

 » Treatment of seed setts with organo-mercurials like aretan or agallol (0.25% 
suspension) helps in eradication of superficial inoculum. Besides, treatment 
of setts in 0.5% bavistin solution reduces the incidence of red rot from 
infected setts.

LOOSE SMUT OF WHEAT

Loose smut, a very serious disease of wheat, is world-wide in occurrence and is a 
serious problem in the humid and semi-humid wheat growing regions. In India, the 
disease occurs in all wheat growing areas, but its incidence is higher in the cooler 
and moist northern parts than in the south. According to an estimate, the disease 
causes about 40% loss in wheat yield every year.

307

Symptoms

It is very difficult to detect infected plants in the field until heading. At this time, 
infected heads emerge earlier than normal heads. The entire inflorescence is commonly 
affected and appears as a mass of olive-black spores, initially covered by a thin gray 
membrane .Once the membrane ruptures, the head appears powdery. Spores are 
dislodged, leaving only the rachis intact. In some cases remnants of glumes and 
awns may be present on the exposed rachis. Smutted headsare shorter than healthy 
heads due to a reduction in the length of the rachis and  peduncle. All  or a portion 
of  the  heads  on  an  infected  plant  may  exhibit  these symptoms. While infected 
heads are shorter, the rest of the plant is slightly taller than healthy plants. Prior to 
heading affected plants have dark green erect leaves. Chlorotic streaks may also be 
visible on the leaves.

Loose smut of wheat: infected inflorescence

Morphology of the causal organism

The fungus responsible for the disease is Ustilago nudavar tritici. The mycelium of 
this fungus consists of multicelluar hyphae which are hyaline but turn brown at 
maturity. The primary mycelium is septate and uninucleate, whereas the secondary 
mycelium is branched, septate and bi-nucleate. In vegetative phase the secondary 
mycelium is profusely branched and spreads in intercellular spaces of the host tissues. 
The pathogen reproduces by the formation of chlamydospores and basidiospores. 
The hyphal cells are transformed into olivaceous brown, spherical and echinulate 
chlamydospores which germinate readily and produce basidia and basidiospores. 
The haploid basidiospores produce uninucleate primary mycelium on germination.

Disease cycle

Ears of infected plants emerge early. The spores released from the infected heads 
land on the later emerging florets and infect the developing seed. Infection during 

308

flowering is favored by frequent rain showers, high humidity and temperature. The 
disease is internally seed borne, where pathogen infects the embryo in the seed. 

Ustilago nuda causing Loose smut of wheat disease showing disease cycle

Control measures

Sow certified seed of wheat varieties that are resistant to loose smut and recommended 
for your  area by  your nearest  Extension  adviser.  None of  the  wheat  varieties  are 
resistant  to  all the physiologic races of the loose smut fungus, however some are 
moderately to highly resistant.

If you grow a variety susceptible to loose smut, be sure to plant certified seed 
purchased from a reliable dealer. Certified seed carries a minimum amount of infection. 
Only wheat fields  that  meet  rigid  specifications  with  respect  to  disease  will 
pass  certification requirements. Competent inspectors closely examine fields of all 
growers who apply for seed certification to make sure that no loose smut, or other 
serious seedborne wheat diseases are present.

The best insurance against loose smut is seed treatment with a fungicide 
containing carboxin or triadimenol systemic fungicides applied to the seed. These 

309

fungicides have the unique ability of being taken up by the germinating seed. They 
check or kill the loose smut fungus within the seed while controlling surface-borne 
bunt or covered smut and a number of fungi that cause weedling blights (damping-
off ). Carboxin is sold under various trade names often in combination with another 
fungicide. These mixtures give excellent smut control and also provide protection 
against a wide range of fungi that attack the germinating seed and young seedling.

The hot-water soak technique for ridding wheat seed of the loose smut fungus, 
while highly effective, is difficult to use and often reduces the germination percentage 
and vigor of the wheat seed. This procedure should be attempted only by experienced 
personnel with the necessary equipment.

Conclusion 

Fungi are a group of such plants which lack root system and chlorophyll. Hence, 
they lack the capacity of mineral absorption and photosynthesis. They obtain their 
nutrition from other living or dead plants and animals. Most fungi are saprophytic, 
i.e., they obtain their nutrition from dead organic matter. There are certain fungi 
which obtain their nutrition from living cells. These are known as parasitic fungi. 
These fiungi also affect the physiological processes of the host. The toxins produced by 
certain fungi cause morphological deformity in the host. Such effects of the parasite 
appear in the host plant in the form of disease symptoms. The disease caused by 
these fungi include late blight of potato, Red rot of sugarcane, Loose smut of wheat 
etc., which can be controlled by number of methods, i.e. chemically or biologically.

References

Butler, E.J. 1973. Fungi and Disease in Plants, Intern, Book Distributers.Dehradun.

David  S.  Ingram ,  1999.  Plant  Disease. Harper  Collins  Publishers,  London 

Mehrotra, R.S. and Aneja, R.S. 1998. An Introduction to Mycology.New Age 

Mishra, A.K. and Bohra, A. 2005. Plant Pathology: Disease and Management, Publ. 

Sambamurty,  A.V.S.S.  1992.  A Text  book  of  Plant  Pathology.I.K.  International 

United  Kingdom.

IntermediatePress.

Agrobios Jodhpur, pp714.

Pvt. Ltd. 504p.

Singh V, Pandey PC and Jain DK. 2005.A Text Book of Botany, Rastogi Publ. Meerut.

Singh, R.S. Principle of Plants Pathology. Oxford and IBH Publ. Co. New Delhi

Singh, R.S.983. Plants Diseases.Oxford and IBH Publ. Co. New Delhi.

310

Strobel,  G.A.  and  D.E.,  Mathre  1970.  Outlines  of  Plant  Pathology.  Van 

NostrandReinhold Co. New York.

Tarr, S.A.J. 1972. The Principle of Plants Pathology. Winchester Press, New York.

Western, J.H. 1971. Diseases of Crop Plants.McMillan Press London.

View publication stats

